So there's a spirit of equality combined with deep inequality, which can make for a very stressful situation.
It's probably as unlikely that you would nowadays become as rich and famous as Bill Gates, as it was unlikely in the 17th century that you would accede to the ranks of the French aristocracy.
But the point is, it doesn't feel that way.
It's made to feel, by magazines and other media outlets, that if you've got energy, a few bright ideas about technology, a garage -- you, too, could start a major thing.
The consequences of this problem make themselves felt in bookshops.
When you go to a large bookshop and look at the self-help sections, as I sometimes do -- if you analyze self-help books produced in the world today, there are basically two kinds.
The first kind tells you, You can do it! You can make it! Anything's possible!
The other kind tells you how to cope with what we politely call low self-esteem, or impolitely call, feeling very bad about yourself.
There's a real correlation between a society that tells people that they can do anything, and the existence of low self-esteem.
So that's another way in which something quite positive can have a nasty kickback.
There is another reason why we might be feeling more anxious -- about our careers, about our status in the world today, than ever before.
And it's, again, linked to something nice.
And that nice thing is called meritocracy.
Everybody, all politicians on Left and Right, agree that meritocracy is a great thing, and we should all be trying to make our societies really, really meritocratic.
In other words -- what is a meritocratic society?
A meritocratic society is one in which, if you've got talent and energy and skill, you will get to the top, nothing should hold you back.
It's a beautiful idea.
The problem is, if you really believe in a society where those who merit to get to the top, get to the top, you'll also, by implication, and in a far more nasty way, believe in a society where those who deserve to get to the bottom also get to the bottom and stay there.
In other words, your position in life comes to seem not accidental, but merited and deserved.
And that makes failure seem much more crushing.
You know, in the Middle Ages, in England, when you met a very poor person, that person would be described as an unfortunate -- literally, somebody who had not been blessed by fortune, an unfortunate.
Nowadays, particularly in the United States, if you meet someone at the bottom of society, they may unkindly be described as a loser.
There's a real difference between an unfortunate and a loser, and that shows 400 years of evolution in society and our belief in who is responsible for our lives.
It's no longer the gods, it's us. We're in the driving seat.
That's exhilarating if you're doing well, and very crushing if you're not.
It leads, in the worst cases -- in the analysis of a sociologist like Emil Durkheim -- it leads to increased rates of suicide.
There are more suicides in developed, individualistic countries than in any other part of the world.
And some of the reason for that is that people take what happens to them extremely personally -- they own their success, but they also own their failure.
Is there any relief from some of these pressures that I've been outlining?
I think there is.
I just want to turn to a few of them.
Let's take meritocracy.
This idea that everybody deserves to get where they get to, I think it's a crazy idea, completely crazy.
I will support any politician of Left and Right, with any halfway-decent meritocratic idea I am a meritocrat in that sense.
But I think it's insane to believe that we will ever make a society that is genuinely meritocratic it's an impossible dream.
The idea that we will make a society where literally everybody is graded, the good at the top, bad at the bottom, exactly done as it should be, is impossible.
There are simply too many random factors accidents, accidents of birth, accidents of things dropping on people's heads, illnesses, etc.
We will never get to grade them, never get to grade people as they should.
I'm drawn to a lovely quote by St. Augustine in The City of God, where he says, It's a sin to judge any man by his post.
In modern English that would mean it's a sin to come to any view of who you should talk to, dependent on their business card.
It's not the post that should count.
According to St. Augustine, only God can really put everybody in their place he's going to do that on the Day of Judgment, with angels and trumpets, and the skies will open.
Insane idea, if you're a secularist person, like me.
But something very valuable in that idea, nevertheless.
In other words, hold your horses when you're coming to judge people.
You don't necessarily know what someone's true value is.
That is an unknown part of them, and we shouldn't behave as though it is known.
There is another source of solace and comfort for all this.
When we think about failing in life, when we think about failure, one of the reasons why we fear failing is not just a loss of income, a loss of status.
What we fear is the judgment and ridicule of others.
And it exists.
The number one organ of ridicule, nowadays, is the newspaper.
If you open the newspaper any day of the week, it's full of people who've messed up their lives.
They've slept with the wrong person, taken the wrong substance, passed the wrong piece of legislation -- whatever it is, and then are fit for ridicule.
In other words, they have failed. And they are described as losers.
Now, is there any alternative to this?
I think the Western tradition shows us one glorious alternative, which is tragedy.
Tragic art, as it developed in the theaters of ancient Greece, in the fifth century B.C., was essentially an art form devoted to tracing how people fail, and also according them a level of sympathy, which ordinary life would not necessarily accord them.
A few years ago, I was thinking about this, and I went to The Sunday Sport, a tabloid newspaper I don't recommend you start reading if you're not familiar with it already.
And I went to talk to them about certain of the great tragedies of Western art.
I wanted to see how they would seize the bare bones of certain stories, if they came in as a news item at the news desk on a Saturday afternoon.
I mentioned Othello they'd not heard of it but were fascinated.
I asked them to write a headline for the story.
They came up with Love-Crazed Immigrant Kills Senator's Daughter.
Splashed across the headline.
I gave them the plotline of Madame Bovary.
Again, a book they were enchanted to discover.
And they wrote Shopaholic Adulteress Swallows Arsenic After Credit Fraud.
And then my favorite -- they really do have a kind of genius of their own, these guys -- my favorite is Sophocles' Oedipus the King Sex With Mum Was Blinding.
In a way, if you like, at one end of the spectrum of sympathy, you've got the tabloid newspaper.
At the other end of the spectrum, you've got tragedy and tragic art.
And I suppose I'm arguing that we should learn a little bit about what's happening in tragic art.
It would be insane to call Hamlet a loser.
He is not a loser, though he has lost.
And I think that is the message of tragedy to us, and why it's so very, very important, I think.
The other thing about modern society and why it causes this anxiety, is that we have nothing at its center that is non-human.
We are the first society to be living in a world where we don't worship anything other than ourselves.
We think very highly of ourselves, and so we should we've put people on the Moon, done all sorts of extraordinary things.
And so we tend to worship ourselves. Our heroes are human heroes.
That's a very new situation.
Most other societies have had, right at their center, the worship of something transcendent a god, a spirit, a natural force, the universe, whatever it is -- something else that is being worshiped.
We've slightly lost the habit of doing that, which is, I think, why we're particularly drawn to nature.
Not for the sake of our health, though it's often presented that way, but because it's an escape from the human anthill.
It's an escape from our own competition, and our own dramas.
And that's why we enjoy looking at glaciers and oceans, and contemplating the Earth from outside its perimeters, etc.
We like to feel in contact with something that is non-human, and that is so deeply important to us.
What I think I've been talking about really is success and failure.
And one of the interesting things about success is that we think we know what it means.
If I said that there's somebody behind the screen who's very successful, certain ideas would immediately come to mind.
You'd think that person might have made a lot of money, achieved renown in some field.
My own theory of success -- I'm somebody who's very interested in success, I really want to be successful, always thinking, how can I be more successful?
But as I get older, I'm also very nuanced about what that word success might mean.
Here's an insight that I've had about success You can't be successful at everything.
We hear a lot of talk about work-life balance.
Nonsense.
You can't have it all. You can't.
So any vision of success has to admit what it's losing out on, where the element of loss is.
And I think any wise life will accept, as I say, that there is going to be an element where we're not succeeding.
And the thing about a successful life is that a lot of the time, our ideas of what it would mean to live successfully are not our own.
They're sucked in from other people chiefly, if you're a man, your father, and if you're a woman, your mother.
Psychoanalysis has been drumming home this message for about 80 years.
No one's quite listening hard enough, but I very much believe it's true.
And we also suck in messages from everything from the television, to advertising, to marketing, etc.
These are hugely powerful forces that define what we want and how we view ourselves.
When we're told that banking is a very respectable profession, a lot of us want to go into banking.
When banking is no longer so respectable, we lose interest in banking.
We are highly open to suggestion.
So what I want to argue for is not that we should give up on our ideas of success, but we should make sure that they are our own.
We should focus in on our ideas, and make sure that we own them that we are truly the authors of our own ambitions.
Because it's bad enough not getting what you want, but it's even worse to have an idea of what it is you want, and find out, at the end of the journey, that it isn't, in fact, what you wanted all along.
So, I'm going to end it there.
But what I really want to stress is by all means, success, yes.
But let's accept the strangeness of some of our ideas.
Let's probe away at our notions of success.
Let's make sure our ideas of success are truly our own.
Chris Anderson That was fascinating.
But how do you reconcile this idea of it being bad to think of someone as a loser, with the idea that a lot of people like, of seizing control of your life, and that a society that encourages that, perhaps has to have some winners and losers?
Alain De Botton Yes, I think it's merely the randomness of the winning and losing process that I want to stress, because the emphasis nowadays is so much on the justice of everything, and politicians always talk about justice.
Now I'm a firm believer in justice, I just think that it's impossible.
So we should do everything we can to pursue it, but we should always remember that whoever is facing us, whatever has happened in their lives, there will be a strong element of the haphazard.
That's what I'm trying to leave room for otherwise, it can get quite claustrophobic.
CA I mean, do you believe that you can combine your kind of kinder, gentler philosophy of work with a successful economy?
Or do you think that you can't, but it doesn't matter that much that we're putting too much emphasis on that?
AB The nightmare thought is that frightening people is the best way to get work out of them, and that somehow the crueler the environment, the more people will rise to the challenge.
You want to think, who would you like as your ideal dad?
And your ideal dad is somebody who is tough but gentle.
And it's a very hard line to make.
We need fathers, as it were, the exemplary father figures in society, avoiding the two extremes, which is the authoritarian disciplinarian on the one hand, and on the other, the lax, no-rules option.
CA Alain De Botton.
AB Thank you very much.
I just want to say my name is Emmanuel Jal.
And I come from a long way.
I've been telling a story that has been so painful for me.
It's been a tough journey for me, traveling the world, telling my story in form of a book.
And also telling it like now.
And also, the easiest one was when I was doing it in form of a music.
So I have branded myself as a war child.
I'm doing this because of an old lady in my village now, who have lost her children.
There is no newspaper to cover her pain, and what she wants to change in this society.
And I'm doing it for a young man who want to create a change and has no way to project his voice because he can't write.
Or there is no Internet, like Facebook, MySpace, YouTube, for them to talk.
Also one thing that kept me pushing this story, this painful stories out, the dreams I have, sometimes, is like the voices of the dead, that I have seen would tell me, Don't give up. Keep on going.
Because sometime I feel like stopping and not doing it, because I didn't know what I was putting myself into.
Well I was born in the most difficult time, when my country was at war.
I saw my village burned down.
The world that meant a lot to me, I saw it vanish in my face.
I saw my aunt in rape when I was only five.
My mother was claimed by the war.
My brothers and sisters were scattered.
And up to now, me and my father were detached and I still have issues with him.
Seeing people die every day, my mother crying, it's like I was raised in a violence.
And that made me call myself a war child.
And not only that, when I was eight I became a child soldier.
I didn't know what was the war for.
But one thing I knew was an image that I saw that stuck in my head.
When I went to the training camp I say, I want to kill as many Muslims, and as many Arabs, as possible.
The training wasn't easy, but that was the driving force, because I wanted to revenge for my family.
I wanted to revenge for my village.
Luckily now things have changed because I came to discover the truth.
What was actually killing us wasn't the Muslims, wasn't the Arabs.
It was somebody sitting somewhere manipulating the system, and using religion to get what they want to get out of us, which is the oil, the diamond, the gold and the land.
So realizing the truth gave me a position to choose should I continue to hate, or let it go?
So I happened to forgive. Now I sing music with the Muslims. I dance with them.
I even had a movie out called War Child, funded by Muslim people.
So that pain has gone out.
But my story is huge.
So I'm just going to go into a different step now, which is easier for me.
I'm going to give you poem called Forced to Sin, which is from my album War Child.
I talk about my story.
One of the journey that I tread when I was tempted to eat my friend because we had no food and we were like around 400.
And only 16 people survived that journey.
So I hope you're going to hear this.
My dreams are like torment.
My every moment.
Voices in my brain, of friends that was slain.
Friends like Lual who died by my side, of starvation.
In the burning jungle, and the desert plain.
Next was I, but Jesus heard my cry.
As I was tempted to eat the rotten flesh of my comrade, he gave me comfort.
We used to raid villages, stealing chickens, goats and sheeps, anything we could eat.
I knew it was rude, but we needed food.
And therefore I was forced to sin, forced to sin to make a living, forced to sin to make a living.
Sometimes you gotta lose to win.
Never give up. Never give in.
Left home at the age of seven.
One year later, live with an AK-47 by my side.
Slept with one eye open wide.
Run, duck, play dead and hide.
I've seen my people die like flies.
But I've never seen a dead body, at least one that I've killed.
But still as I wonder, I won't go under.
Guns barking like lightning and thunder.
As a child so young and tender, Words I can't forget I still remember.
I saw sergeant command raising his hand, no retreat, no surrender.
I carry the banner of the trauma.
War child, child without a mama, still fighting in the saga.
Yet as I wage this new war I'm not alone in this drama.
No sit or stop, as I reach for the top I'm fully dedicated like a patriotic cop.
I'm on a fight, day and night.
Sometime I do wrong in order to make things right.
It's like I'm living a dream.
First time I'm feeling like a human being.
Ah! The children of Darfur.
Your empty bellies on the telly and now it's you that I'm fighting for.
Left home.
Don't even know the day I'll ever return.
My country is war-torn.
Music I used to hear was bombs and fire of guns.
So many people die that I don't even cry no more.
Ask God question, what am I here for.
And why are my people poor.
And why, why when the rest of the children were learning how to read and write, I was learning how to fight.
I ate snails, vultures, rabbits, snakes, and anything that had life.
I was ready to eat.
I know it's a shame. But who is to be blamed?
That's my story shared in the form of a lesson.
What energized me and kept me going is the music I do.
I never saw anybody to tell my story to them so they could advise me or do therapy.
So the music had been my therapy for me.
It's been where I actually see heaven, where I can be happy, where I can be a child again, in dances, through music.
So one thing I know about music music is the only thing that has power to enter your cell system, your mind, your heart, influence your soul and your spirit, and can even influence the way you live without even you knowing.
Music is the only thing that can make you want to wake up your bed and shake your leg, without even wanting to do it.
And so the power music has I normally compare to the power love when love doesn't see a color.
You know, if you fall in love with a frog, that's it.
One testimony about how I find music is powerful is when I was still a soldier back then.
I hated the people in the north.
But I don't know why I don't hate their music.
So we party and dance to their music.
And one thing that shocked me is one day they brought an Arab musician to come and entertain the soldiers.
And I almost broke my leg dancing to his music.
But I had this question.
So now I'm doing music so I know what the power of music is.
So what's happening here?
I've been in a painful journey.
Today is day number 233 in which I only eat dinner.
I don't eat breakfast. No lunch.
And I've done a campaign called Lose to Win.
Where I'm losing so that I could win the battle that I'm fighting now.
So my breakfast, my lunch, I donate it to a charity that I founded because we want to build a school in Sudan.
And I'm doing this because also it's a normal thing in my home, people eat one meal a day.
Here I am in the West. I choose not to.
So in my village now, kids there, they normally listen to BBC, or any radio, and they are waiting to know, the day Emmanuel will eat his breakfast it means he got the money to build our school.
And so I made a commitment. I say, I'm gonna not eat my breakfast.
I thought I was famous enough that I would raise the money within one month, but I've been humbled.
So it's taken me 232 days.
And I said, No stop until we get it.
And like it's been done on Facebook, MySpace.
The people are giving three dollars.
The lowest amount we ever got was 20 cents.
Somebody donated 20 cents online.
I don't know how they did it.
But that moved me.
And so, the importance of education to me is what I'm willing to die for.
I'm willing to die for this, because I know what it can do to my people.
Education enlighten your brain, give you so many chances, and you're able to survive.
As a nation we have been crippled.
For so many years we have fed on aid.
You see a 20-years-old, 30-years-old families in a refugee camps.
They only get the food that drops from the sky, from the U.N.
So these people, you're killing a whole generation if you just give them aid.
If anybody want to help us this is what we need.
Give us tools. Give the farmers tools.
It's rain. Africa is fertile. They can grow the crops.
Invest in education.
Education so that we have strong institution that can create a revolution to change everything.
Because we have all those old men that are creating wars in Africa. They will die soon.
But if you invest in education then we'll be able to change Africa.
That's what I'm asking.
So in order to do that, I founded a charter called Gua Africa, where we put kids in school.
And now we have a couple in university.
We have like 40 kids, ex-child soldiers mixed with anybody that we feel like we want to support.
And I said I'm going to put it in practice.
And with the people that are going to follow me and help me do things.
That's what I want to do to change, to make a difference in the world.
Well now, my time is going, so I want to sing a song.
But I'll ask you guys to stand up so we celebrate the life of a British aid worker called Emma McCune that made it possible for me to be here.
I'm gonna sing this song, just to inspire you how this woman has made a difference.
She came to my country and saw the importance of education.
She said the only way to help Sudan is to invest in the women, educating them, educating the children, so that they could come and create a revolution in this complex society.
So she even ended up marrying a commander from the SPLA.
And she rescued over 150 child soldiers.
One of them happened to be me now.
And so at this moment I want to ask to celebrate Emma with me.
Are you guys ready to celebrate Emma?
Audience Yes!
Emmanuel Jal All right.
♫ This one goes to Emma McCune ♫ ♫ Angel to rescue came one afternoon ♫ ♫ I'm here because you rescued me ♫ ♫ I'm proud to carry your legacy ♫ ♫ Thank you. Bless you. R.I.P. ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? Yeah! ♫ ♫ Yeah! Yeah! ♫ ♫ You would have seen my face on the telly ♫ ♫ Fat hungry belly ♫ ♫ Flies in my eyes, head too big for my size ♫ ♫ Just another little starving child ♫ ♫ Running around in Africa, born to be wild ♫ ♫ Praise God, praise the Almighty ♫ ♫ for sending an angel to rescue me ♫ ♫ I got a reason for being on this Earth ♫ ♫ 'Cause I know more than many what a life is worth ♫ ♫ Now that I got a chance to stand my ground ♫ ♫ I'm gonna run over mountains, leaps and bounds ♫ ♫ I ain't an angel, hope I'll be one soon ♫ ♫ And if I am, I wanna be like Emma McCune ♫ ♫ Me! What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? Yeah! Yeah!♫ ♫ Yeah, Yeah! ♫ ♫ I would have probably died from starvation ♫ ♫ Or some other wretched disease ♫ ♫ I would have grown up with no education ♫ ♫ Just another refugee ♫ ♫ I stand here because somebody cared ♫ ♫ I stand here because somebody dared ♫ ♫ I know there is a lot of Emmas out there ♫ ♫ Who is willing and trying to save a life of a child ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ I remember the time when I was small ♫ ♫ When I couldn't read or write at all ♫ ♫ Now I'm all grown up, I got my education ♫ ♫ The sky is the limit and I can't be stopped by no one ♫ ♫ How I prayed for this day to come ♫ ♫ And I pray that the world find wisdom ♫ ♫ To give the poor in need some assistance ♫ ♫ Instead of putting up resistance, yeah ♫ ♫ Sitting and waiting for the politics to fix this ♫ ♫ It ain't gonna happen ♫ ♫ They're all sitting on they asses ♫ ♫ Popping champagne and sponging off the masses ♫ ♫ Coming from a refugee boy-soldier ♫ ♫ But I still got my dignity ♫ ♫ I gotta say it again ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me ♫ ♫ I'd be a corpse on the African plain ♫ Is there anybody who's here in the back, some love.
Big scream for Emma everybody.
Yeah! I'm gonna get crazy now.
♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ Yeah, Yeah ♫ ♫ Yeah, I would have probably died from starvation ♫ ♫ Or some other wretched disease ♫ ♫ I would have grown up with no education ♫ ♫ Just another refugee ♫  Thank you.
Go save a life of a child.
Do we live in a borderless world?
Before you answer that, have a look at this map.
Contemporary political map shows that we have over 200 countries in the world today.
That's probably more than at any time in centuries.
Now, many of you will object.
For you this would be a more appropriate map.
You could call it TEDistan.
In TEDistan, there are no borders, just connected spaces and unconnected spaces.
Most of you probably reside in one of the 40 dots on this screen, of the many more that represent 90 percent of the world economy.
But let's talk about the 90 percent of the world population that will never leave the place in which they were born.
For them, nations, countries, boundaries, borders still matter a great deal, and often violently.
Now here at TED, we're solving some of the great riddles of science and mysteries of the universe.
Well here is a fundamental problem we have not solved our basic political geography.
How do we distribute ourselves around the world?
Now this is important, because border conflicts justify so much of the world's military-industrial complex.
Border conflicts can derail so much of the progress that we hope to achieve here.
So I think we need a deeper understanding of how people, money, power, religion, culture, technology interact to change the map of the world.
And we can try to anticipate those changes, and shape them in a more constructive direction.
So we're going to look at some maps of the past, the present and some maps you haven't seen in order to get a sense of where things are going.
Let's start with the world of 1945.
1945 there were just 100 countries in the world.
After World War II, Europe was devastated, but still held large overseas colonies French West Africa, British East Africa, South Asia, and so forth.
Then over the late '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s and '80s, waves of decolonization took place.
Over 50 new countries were born.
You can see that Africa has been fragmented.
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, South East Asian nations created.
Then came the end of the Cold War.
The end of the Cold War and the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
You had the creation of new states in Eastern Europe, the former Yugoslav republics and the Balkans, and the 'stans of central Asia.
Today we have 200 countries in the world.
The entire planet is covered by sovereign, independent nation-states.
Does that mean that someone's gain has to be someone else's loss?
Let's zoom in on one of the most strategic areas of the world, Eastern Eurasia.
As you can see on this map, Russia is still the largest country in the world.
And as you know, China is the most populous.
And they share a lengthy land border.
What you don't see on this map is that most of Russia's 150 million people are concentrated in its western provinces and areas that are close to Europe.
And only 30 million people are in its eastern areas.
In fact, the World Bank predicts that Russia's population is declining towards about 120 million people And there is another thing that you don't see on this map.
Stalin, Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders forced Russians out to the far east to be in gulags, labor camps, nuclear cities, whatever the case was.
But as oil prices rose, Russian governments have invested in infrastructure to unite the country, east and west.
But nothing has more perversely impacted Russia's demographic distribution, because the people in the east, who never wanted to be there anyway, have gotten on those trains and roads and gone back to the west.
As a result, in the Russian far east today, which is twice the size of India, you have exactly six million Russians.
So let's get a sense of what is happening in this part of the world.
We can start with Mongolia, or as some call it, Mine-golia.
Why do they call it that?
Because in Mine-golia, Chinese firms operate and own most of the mines -- copper, zinc, gold -- and they truck the resources south and east into mainland China.
China isn't conquering Mongolia.
It's buying it.
Colonies were once conquered. Today countries are bought.
So let's apply this principle to Siberia.
Siberia most of you probably think of as a cold, desolate, unlivable place.
But in fact, with global warming and rising temperatures, all of a sudden you have vast wheat fields and agribusiness, and grain being produced in Siberia.
But who is it going to feed?
Well, just on the other side of the Amo River, in the Heilongjiang and Harbin provinces of China, you have over 100 million people.
That's larger than the entire population of Russia.
Every single year, for at least a decade or more, 60,000 of them have been voting with their feet, crossing, moving north and inhabiting this desolate terrain.
They set up their own bazaars and medical clinics.
They've taken over the timber industry and been shipping the lumber east, back into China.
Again, like Mongolia, China isn't conquering Russia. It's just leasing it.
That's what I call globalization Chinese style.
Now maybe this is what the map of the region might look like in 10 to 20 years.
But hold on. This map is 700 years old.
This is the map of the Yuan Dynasty, led by Kublai Khan, the grandson of Genghis Khan.
So history doesn't necessarily repeat itself, but it does rhyme.
This is just to give you a taste of what's happening in this part of the world.
Again, globalization Chinese style.
Because globalization opens up all kinds of ways for us to undermine and change the way we think about political geography.
So, the history of East Asia in fact, people don't think about nations and borders.
They think more in terms of empires and hierarchies, usually Chinese or Japanese.
Well it's China's turn again.
So let's look at how China is re-establishing that hierarchy in the far East.
It starts with the global hubs.
Remember the 40 dots on the nighttime map that show the hubs of the global economy?
East Asia today has more of those global hubs than any other region in the world.
Tokyo, Seoul, Beijing, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore and Sidney.
These are the filters and funnels of global capital.
Trillions of dollars a year are being brought into the region, so much of it being invested into China.
Then there is trade.
These vectors and arrows represent ever stronger trade relationships that China has with every country in the region.
Specifically, it targets Japan and Korea and Australia, countries that are strong allies of the United States.
Australia, for example, is heavily dependent on exporting iron ore and natural gas to China.
For poorer countries, China reduces tariffs so that Laos and Cambodia can sell their goods more cheaply and become dependent on exporting to China as well.
And now many of you have been reading in the news how people are looking to China to lead the rebound, the economic rebound, not just in Asia, but potentially for the world.
The Asian free trade zone, almost free trade zone, that's emerging now has a greater trade volume than trade across the Pacific.
So China is becoming the anchor of the economy in the region.
Another pillar of this strategy is diplomacy.
China has signed military agreements with many countries in the region.
It has become the hub of diplomatic institutions such as the East Asian Community.
Some of these organizations don't even have the United States as a member.
There is a treaty of nonaggression between countries, such that if there were a conflict between China and the United States, most countries vow to just sit it out, including American allies like Korea and Australia.
Another pillar of the strategy, like Russia, is demographic.
China exports business people, nannies, students, teachers to teach Chinese around the region, to intermarry and to occupy ever greater commanding heights of the economies.
Already ethnic Chinese people in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia are the real key factors and drivers in the economies there.
Chinese pride is resurgent in the region as a result.
Singapore, for example, used to ban Chinese language education.
Now it encourages it.
If you add it all up what do you get?
Well, if you remember before World War II, Japan had a vision for a greater Japanese co-prosperity sphere.
What's emerging today is what you might call a greater Chinese co-prosperity sphere.
So no matter what the lines on the map tell you in terms of nations and borders, what you really have emerging in the far east are national cultures, but in a much more fluid, imperial zone.
All of this is happening without firing a shot.
That's most certainly not the case in the Middle East where countries are still very uncomfortable in the borders left behind by European colonialists.
So what can we do to think about borders differently in this part of the world?
What lines on the map should we focus on?
What I want to present to you is what I call state building, day by day.
Let's start with Iraq.
Six years after the U.S. invasion of Iraq, the country still exists more on a map than it does in reality.
Oil used to be one of the forces holding Iraq together now it is the most significant cause of the country's disintegration.
The reason is Kurdistan.
The Kurds for 3,000 years have been waging a struggle for independence, and now is their chance to finally have it.
These are pipeline routes, which emerge from Kurdistan, which is an oil-rich region.
And today, if you go to Kurdistan, you'll see that Kurdish Peshmerga guerillas are squaring off against the Sunni Iraqi army.
But what are they guarding?
Is it really a border on the map?
No. It's the pipelines.
If the Kurds can control their pipelines, they can set the terms of their own statehood.
Now should we be upset about this, about the potential disintegration of Iraq?
I don't believe we should.
Iraq will still be the second largest oil producer in the world, behind Saudi Arabia.
And we'll have a chance to solve a 3,000 year old dispute.
Now remember Kurdistan is landlocked.
It has no choice but to behave.
In order to profit from its oil it has to export it through Turkey or Syria, and other countries, and Iraq itself.
And therefore it has to have amicable relations with them.
Now lets look at a perennial conflict in the region.
That is, of course, in Palestine.
Palestine is something of a cartographic anomaly because it's two parts Palestinian, one part Israel.
30 years of rose garden diplomacy have not delivered us peace in this conflict.
What might? I believe that what might solve the problem is infrastructure.
Today donors are spending billions of dollars on this.
These two arrows are an arc, an arc of commuter railroads and other infrastructure that link the West Bank and Gaza.
If Gaza can have a functioning port and be linked to the West Bank, you can have a viable Palestinian state, Palestinian economy.
That, I believe, is going to bring peace to this particular conflict.
The lesson from Kurdistan and from Palestine is that independence alone, without infrastructure, is futile.
Now what might this entire region look like if in fact we focus on other lines on the map besides borders, when the insecurities might abate?
The last time that was the case was actually a century ago, during the Ottoman Empire.
This is the Hejaz Railway.
The Hejaz Railway ran from Istanbul to Medina via Damascus.
It even had an offshoot running to Haifa in what is today Israel, on the Mediterranean Sea.
But today the Hejaz Railway lies in tatters, ruins.
If we were to focus on reconstructing these curvy lines on the map, infrastructure, that cross the straight lines, the borders, I believe the Middle East would be a far more peaceful region.
Now let's look at another part of the world, the former Soviet Republics of Central Asia, the 'stans.
These countries' borders originate from Stalin's decrees.
He purposely did not want these countries to make sense.
He wanted ethnicities to mingle in ways that would allow him to divide and rule.
Fortunately for them, most of their oil and gas resources were discovered after the Soviet Union collapsed.
Now I know some of you may be thinking, Oil, oil, oil.
Why is it all he's talking about is oil?
Well, there is a big difference in the way we used to talk about oil and the way we're talking about it now.
Before it was, how do we control their oil?
Now it's their oil for their own purposes.
And I assure you it's every bit as important to them as it might have been to colonizers and imperialists.
Here are just some of the pipeline projections and possibilities and scenarios and routes that are being mapped out for the next several decades.
A great deal of them.
For a number of countries in this part of the world, having pipelines is the ticket to becoming part of the global economy and for having some meaning besides the borders that they are not loyal to themselves.
Just take Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan was a forgotten corner of the Caucuses, but now with the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline into Turkey, it has rebranded itself as the frontier of the west.
Then there is Turkmenistan, which most people think of as a frozen basket case.
But now it's contributing gas across the Caspian Sea to provide for Europe, and even a potentially Turkmen- Afghan-Pakistan-India pipeline as well.
Then there is Kazakhstan, which didn't even have a name before.
It was more considered South Siberia during the Soviet Union.
Today most people recognize Kazakhstan as an emerging geopolitical player. Why?
Because it has shrewdly designed pipelines to flow across the Caspian, north through Russia, and even east to China.
More pipelines means more silk roads, instead of the Great Game.
The Great Game connotes dominance of one over the other.
Silk road connotes independence and mutual trust.
The more pipelines we have, the more silk roads we'll have, and the less of a dominant Great Game competition we'll have in the 21st century.
Now let's look at the only part of the world that really has brought down its borders, and how that has enhanced its strength.
And that is, of course, Europe.
The European Union began as just the coal and steel community of six countries, and their main purpose was really to keep the rehabilitation of Germany to happen in a peaceful way.
But then eventually it grew into 12 countries, and those are the 12 stars on the European flag.
The E.U. also became a currency block, and is now the most powerful trade block in the entire world.
On average, the E.U. has grown by one country per year since the end of the Cold War.
In fact most of that happened on just one day.
In 2004, 15 new countries joined the E.U.
and now you have what most people consider a zone of peace spanning 27 countries and 450 million people.
So what is next? What is the future of the European Union?
Well in light blue, you see the zones or the regions that are at least two-thirds or more dependent on the European Union for trade and investment.
What does that tell us? Trade and investment tell us that Europe is putting its money where its mouth is.
Even if these regions aren't part of the E.U., they are becoming part of its sphere of influence.
Just take the Balkans. Croatia, Serbia Bosnia, they're not members of the E.U. yet.
But you can get on a German ICE train and make it almost to Albania.
In Bosnia you use the Euro currency already, and that's the only currency they're probably ever going to have.
So, looking at other parts of Europe's periphery, such as North Africa.
On average, every year or two, a new oil or gas pipeline opens up under the Mediterranean, connecting North Africa to Europe.
That not only helps Europe diminish its reliance on Russia for energy, but if you travel to North Africa today, you'll hear more and more people saying that they don't really think of their region as the Middle East.
So in other words, I believe that President Sarkozy of France is right when he talks about a Mediterranean union.
Now let's look at Turkey and the Caucasus.
I mentioned Azerbaijan before.
That corridor of Turkey and the Caucasus has become the conduit for 20 percent of Europe's energy supply.
So does Turkey really have to be a member of the European Union?
I don't think it does. I think it's already part of a Euro-Turkish superpower.
So what's next? Where are we going to see borders change and new countries born?
Well, South Central Asia, South West Asia is a very good place to start.
Eight years after the U.S. invaded Afghanistan there is still a tremendous amount of instability.
Pakistan and Afghanistan are still so fragile that neither of them have dealt constructively with the problem of Pashtun nationalism.
This is the flag that flies in the minds of 20 million Pashtuns who live on both sides of the Afghan and Pakistan border.
Let's not neglect the insurgency just to the south, Balochistan. Two weeks ago, Balochi rebels attacked a Pakistani military garrison, and this was the flag that they raised over it.
The post-colonial entropy that is happening around the world is accelerating, and I expect more such changes to occur in the map as the states fragment.
Of course, we can't forget Africa.
53 countries, and by far the most number of suspiciously straight lines on the map.
If we were to look at all of Africa we could most certainly acknowledge far more, tribal divisions and so forth.
But let's just look at Sudan, the second-largest country in Africa.
It has three ongoing civil wars, the genocide in Darfur, which you all know about, the civil war in the east of the country, and south Sudan.
South Sudan is going to be having a referendum in 2011 in which it is very likely to vote itself independence.
Now let's go up to the Arctic Circle.
There is a great race on for energy resources under the Arctic seabed.
Who will win? Canada? Russia? The United States?
Actually Greenland.
Several weeks ago Greenland's 60,000 people voted themselves self-governance rights from Denmark.
So Denmark is about to get a whole lot smaller.
What is the lesson from all of this?
Geopolitics is a very unsentimental discipline.
It's constantly morphing and changing the world, like climate change.
And like our relationship with the ecosystem we're always searching for equilibrium in how we divide ourselves across the planet.
Now we fear changes on the map.
We fear civil wars, death tolls, having to learn the names of new countries.
But I believe that the inertia of the existing borders that we have today is far worse and far more violent.
The question is how do we change those borders, and what lines do we focus on?
I believe we focus on the lines that cross borders, the infrastructure lines.
Then we'll wind up with the world we want, a borderless one.
Thank you.
I'm a storyteller.
And I would like to tell you a few personal stories about what I like to call the danger of the single story.
I grew up on a university campus in eastern Nigeria.
My mother says that I started reading at the age of two, although I think four is probably close to the truth.
So I was an early reader, and what I read were British and American children's books.
I was also an early writer, and when I began to write, at about the age of seven, stories in pencil with crayon illustrations that my poor mother was obligated to read, I wrote exactly the kinds of stories I was reading All my characters were white and blue-eyed, they played in the snow, they ate apples,  and they talked a lot about the weather, how lovely it was that the sun had come out.
Now, this despite the fact that I lived in Nigeria.
I had never been outside Nigeria.
We didn't have snow, we ate mangoes, and we never talked about the weather, because there was no need to.
My characters also drank a lot of ginger beer, because the characters in the British books I read drank ginger beer.
Never mind that I had no idea what ginger beer was.
And for many years afterwards, I would have a desperate desire to taste ginger beer.
But that is another story.
What this demonstrates, I think, is how impressionable and vulnerable we are in the face of a story, particularly as children.
Because all I had read were books in which characters were foreign, I had become convinced that books by their very nature had to have foreigners in them and had to be about things with which I could not personally identify.
Now, things changed when I discovered African books.
There weren't many of them available, and they weren't quite as easy to find as the foreign books.
But because of writers like Chinua Achebe and Camara Laye, I went through a mental shift in my perception of literature.
I realized that people like me, girls with skin the color of chocolate, whose kinky hair could not form ponytails, could also exist in literature.
I started to write about things I recognized.
Now, I loved those American and British books I read.
They stirred my imagination. They opened up new worlds for me.
But the unintended consequence was that I did not know that people like me could exist in literature.
So what the discovery of African writers did for me was this It saved me from having a single story of what books are.
I come from a conventional, middle-class Nigerian family.
My father was a professor.
My mother was an administrator.
And so we had, as was the norm, live-in domestic help, who would often come from nearby rural villages.
So, the year I turned eight, we got a new house boy.
His name was Fide.
The only thing my mother told us about him was that his family was very poor.
My mother sent yams and rice, and our old clothes, to his family.
And when I didn't finish my dinner, my mother would say, Finish your food! Don't you know? People like Fide's family have nothing.
So I felt enormous pity for Fide's family.
Then one Saturday, we went to his village to visit, and his mother showed us a beautifully patterned basket made of dyed raffia that his brother had made.
I was startled.
It had not occurred to me that anybody in his family could actually make something.
All I had heard about them was how poor they were, so that it had become impossible for me to see them as anything else but poor.
Their poverty was my single story of them.
Years later, I thought about this when I left Nigeria to go to university in the United States.
I was 19.
My American roommate was shocked by me.
She asked where I had learned to speak English so well, and was confused when I said that Nigeria happened to have English as its official language.
She asked if she could listen to what she called my tribal music, and was consequently very disappointed when I produced my tape of Mariah Carey.
She assumed that I did not know how to use a stove.
What struck me was this She had felt sorry for me even before she saw me.
Her default position toward me, as an African, was a kind of patronizing, well-meaning pity.
My roommate had a single story of Africa a single story of catastrophe.
In this single story, there was no possibility of Africans being similar to her in any way, no possibility of feelings more complex than pity, no possibility of a connection as human equals.
I must say that before I went to the U.S., I didn't consciously identify as African.
But in the U.S., whenever Africa came up, people turned to me.
Never mind that I knew nothing about places like Namibia.
But I did come to embrace this new identity, and in many ways I think of myself now as African.
Although I still get quite irritable when Africa is referred to as a country, the most recent example being my otherwise wonderful flight from Lagos two days ago, in which there was an announcement on the Virgin flight about the charity work in India, Africa and other countries.
So, after I had spent some years in the U.S. as an African, I began to understand my roommate's response to me.
If I had not grown up in Nigeria, and if all I knew about Africa were from popular images, I too would think that Africa was a place of beautiful landscapes, beautiful animals, and incomprehensible people, fighting senseless wars, dying of poverty and AIDS, unable to speak for themselves and waiting to be saved by a kind, white foreigner.
I would see Africans in the same way that I, as a child, had seen Fide's family.
This single story of Africa ultimately comes, I think, from Western literature.
Now, here is a quote from the writing of a London merchant called John Lok, who sailed to west Africa in 1561 and kept a fascinating account of his voyage.
After referring to the black Africans as beasts who have no houses, he writes, They are also people without heads, having their mouth and eyes in their breasts.
Now, I've laughed every time I've read this.
And one must admire the imagination of John Lok.
But what is important about his writing is that it represents the beginning of a tradition of telling African stories in the West A tradition of Sub-Saharan Africa as a place of negatives, of difference, of darkness, of people who, in the words of the wonderful poet Rudyard Kipling, are half devil, half child.
And so, I began to realize that my American roommate must have throughout her life seen and heard different versions of this single story, as had a professor, who once told me that my novel was not authentically African.
Now, I was quite willing to contend that there were a number of things wrong with the novel, that it had failed in a number of places, but I had not quite imagined that it had failed at achieving something called African authenticity.
In fact, I did not know what African authenticity was.
The professor told me that my characters were too much like him, an educated and middle-class man.
My characters drove cars.
They were not starving.
Therefore they were not authentically African.
But I must quickly add that I too am just as guilty in the question of the single story.
A few years ago, I visited Mexico from the U.S.
The political climate in the U.S. at the time was tense, and there were debates going on about immigration.
And, as often happens in America, immigration became synonymous with Mexicans.
There were endless stories of Mexicans as people who were fleecing the healthcare system, sneaking across the border, being arrested at the border, that sort of thing.
I remember walking around on my first day in Guadalajara, watching the people going to work, rolling up tortillas in the marketplace, smoking, laughing.
I remember first feeling slight surprise.
And then, I was overwhelmed with shame.
I realized that I had been so immersed in the media coverage of Mexicans that they had become one thing in my mind, the abject immigrant.
I had bought into the single story of Mexicans and I could not have been more ashamed of myself.
So that is how to create a single story, show a people as one thing, as only one thing, over and over again, and that is what they become.
It is impossible to talk about the single story without talking about power.
There is a word, an Igbo word, that I think about whenever I think about the power structures of the world, and it is nkali.
It's a noun that loosely translates to to be greater than another.
Like our economic and political worlds, stories too are defined by the principle of nkali How they are told, who tells them, when they're told, how many stories are told, are really dependent on power.
Power is the ability not just to tell the story of another person, but to make it the definitive story of that person.
The Palestinian poet Mourid Barghouti writes that if you want to dispossess a people, the simplest way to do it is to tell their story and to start with, secondly.
Start the story with the arrows of the Native Americans, and not with the arrival of the British, and you have an entirely different story.
Start the story with the failure of the African state, and not with the colonial creation of the African state, and you have an entirely different story.
I recently spoke at a university where a student told me that it was such a shame that Nigerian men were physical abusers like the father character in my novel.
I told him that I had just read a novel called American Psycho --  -- and that it was such a shame that young Americans were serial murderers.
Now, obviously I said this in a fit of mild irritation.
But it would never have occurred to me to think that just because I had read a novel in which a character was a serial killer that he was somehow representative of all Americans.
This is not because I am a better person than that student, but because of America's cultural and economic power, I had many stories of America.
I had read Tyler and Updike and Steinbeck and Gaitskill.
I did not have a single story of America.
When I learned, some years ago, that writers were expected to have had really unhappy childhoods to be successful, I began to think about how I could invent horrible things my parents had done to me.
But the truth is that I had a very happy childhood, full of laughter and love, in a very close-knit family.
But I also had grandfathers who died in refugee camps.
My cousin Polle died because he could not get adequate healthcare.
One of my closest friends, Okoloma, died in a plane crash because our fire trucks did not have water.
I grew up under repressive military governments that devalued education, so that sometimes, my parents were not paid their salaries.
And so, as a child, I saw jam disappear from the breakfast table, then margarine disappeared, then bread became too expensive, then milk became rationed.
And most of all, a kind of normalized political fear invaded our lives.
All of these stories make me who I am.
But to insist on only these negative stories is to flatten my experience and to overlook the many other stories that formed me.
The single story creates stereotypes, and the problem with stereotypes is not that they are untrue, but that they are incomplete.
They make one story become the only story.
Of course, Africa is a continent full of catastrophes There are immense ones, such as the horrific rapes in Congo and depressing ones, such as the fact that 5,000 people apply for one job vacancy in Nigeria.
But there are other stories that are not about catastrophe, and it is very important, it is just as important, to talk about them.
I've always felt that it is impossible to engage properly with a place or a person without engaging with all of the stories of that place and that person.
The consequence of the single story is this It robs people of dignity.
It makes our recognition of our equal humanity difficult.
It emphasizes how we are different rather than how we are similar.
So what if before my Mexican trip, I had followed the immigration debate from both sides, the U.S. and the Mexican?
What if my mother had told us that Fide's family was poor and hardworking?
What if we had an African television network that broadcast diverse African stories all over the world?
What the Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe calls a balance of stories.
What if my roommate knew about my Nigerian publisher, Muhtar Bakare, a remarkable man who left his job in a bank to follow his dream and start a publishing house?
Now, the conventional wisdom was that Nigerians don't read literature.
He disagreed.
He felt that people who could read, would read, if you made literature affordable and available to them.
Shortly after he published my first novel, I went to a TV station in Lagos to do an interview, and a woman who worked there as a messenger came up to me and said, I really liked your novel. I didn't like the ending.
Now, you must write a sequel, and this is what will happen ...
And she went on to tell me what to write in the sequel.
I was not only charmed, I was very moved.
Here was a woman, part of the ordinary masses of Nigerians, who were not supposed to be readers.
She had not only read the book, but she had taken ownership of it and felt justified in telling me what to write in the sequel.
Now, what if my roommate knew about my friend Funmi Iyanda, a fearless woman who hosts a TV show in Lagos, and is determined to tell the stories that we prefer to forget?
What if my roommate knew about the heart procedure that was performed in the Lagos hospital last week?
What if my roommate knew about contemporary Nigerian music, talented people singing in English and Pidgin, and Igbo and Yoruba and Ijo, mixing influences from Jay-Z to Fela to Bob Marley to their grandfathers.
What if my roommate knew about the female lawyer who recently went to court in Nigeria to challenge a ridiculous law that required women to get their husband's consent before renewing their passports?
What if my roommate knew about Nollywood, full of innovative people making films despite great technical odds, films so popular that they really are the best example of Nigerians consuming what they produce?
What if my roommate knew about my wonderfully ambitious hair braider, who has just started her own business selling hair extensions?
Or about the millions of other Nigerians who start businesses and sometimes fail, but continue to nurse ambition?
Every time I am home I am confronted with the usual sources of irritation for most Nigerians our failed infrastructure, our failed government, but also by the incredible resilience of people who thrive despite the government, rather than because of it.
I teach writing workshops in Lagos every summer, and it is amazing to me how many people apply, how many people are eager to write, to tell stories.
My Nigerian publisher and I have just started a non-profit called Farafina Trust, and we have big dreams of building libraries and refurbishing libraries that already exist and providing books for state schools that don't have anything in their libraries, and also of organizing lots and lots of workshops, in reading and writing, for all the people who are eager to tell our many stories.
Stories matter.
Many stories matter.
Stories have been used to dispossess and to malign, but stories can also be used to empower and to humanize.
Stories can break the dignity of a people, but stories can also repair that broken dignity.
The American writer Alice Walker wrote this about her Southern relatives who had moved to the North.
She introduced them to a book about the Southern life that they had left behind.
They sat around, reading the book themselves, listening to me read the book, and a kind of paradise was regained.
I would like to end with this thought That when we reject the single story, when we realize that there is never a single story about any place, we regain a kind of paradise.
Good morning. How are you?
Audience Good.
I've been blown away by the whole thing.
In fact, I'm leaving.
There have been three themes running through the conference, which are relevant to what I want to talk about.
One is the extraordinary evidence of human creativity in all of the presentations that we've had and in all of the people here just the variety of it and the range of it.
The second is that it's put us in a place where we have no idea what's going to happen in terms of the future.
No idea how this may play out.
I have an interest in education.
Actually, what I find is, everybody has an interest in education.
Don't you?
I find this very interesting.
If you're at a dinner party, and you say you work in education -- actually, you're not often at dinner parties, frankly.
If you work in education, you're not asked.
And you're never asked back, curiously. That's strange to me.
But if you are, and you say to somebody, you know, they say, What do you do?
and you say you work in education, you can see the blood run from their face.
They're like, Oh my God. Why me?
My one night out all week.
But if you ask about their education, they pin you to the wall, because it's one of those things that goes deep with people, am I right?
Like religion and money and other things.
So I have a big interest in education, and I think we all do.
We have a huge vested interest in it, partly because it's education that's meant to take us into this future that we can't grasp.
If you think of it, children starting school this year will be retiring in 2065.
Nobody has a clue, despite all the expertise that's been on parade for the past four days, what the world will look like in five years' time.
And yet, we're meant to be educating them for it.
So the unpredictability, I think, is extraordinary.
And the third part of this is that we've all agreed, nonetheless, on the really extraordinary capacities that children have -- their capacities for innovation.
I mean, Sirena last night was a marvel, wasn't she?
Just seeing what she could do.
And she's exceptional, but I think she's not, so to speak, exceptional in the whole of childhood.
What you have there is a person of extraordinary dedication who found a talent.
And my contention is, all kids have tremendous talents, and we squander them, pretty ruthlessly.
So I want to talk about education, and I want to talk about creativity.
My contention is that creativity now is as important in education as literacy, and we should treat it with the same status.
That was it, by the way. Thank you very much.
So, 15 minutes left.
Well, I was born ...   I heard a great story recently -- I love telling it -- of a little girl who was in a drawing lesson.
She was six, and she was at the back, drawing, and the teacher said this girl hardly ever paid attention, and in this drawing lesson, she did.
The teacher was fascinated.
She went over to her, and she said, What are you drawing?
And the girl said, I'm drawing a picture of God.
And the teacher said, But nobody knows what God looks like.
And the girl said, They will in a minute.
When my son was four in England -- actually, he was four everywhere, to be honest.
If we're being strict about it, wherever he went, he was four that year.
He was in the Nativity play. Do you remember the story?
No, it was big, it was a big story.
Mel Gibson did the sequel, you may have seen it.
Nativity II.
But James got the part of Joseph, which we were thrilled about.
We considered this to be one of the lead parts.
We had the place crammed full of agents in T-shirts James Robinson IS Joseph!
He didn't have to speak, but you know the bit where the three kings come in?
They come in bearing gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh.
This really happened.
We were sitting there, and I think they just went out of sequence, because we talked to the little boy afterward and said, You OK with that? They said, Yeah, why? Was that wrong?
They just switched.
The three boys came in, four-year-olds with tea towels on their heads.
They put these boxes down, and the first boy said, I bring you gold.
And the second boy said, I bring you myrrh.
And the third boy said, Frank sent this.
What these things have in common is that kids will take a chance.
If they don't know, they'll have a go.
Am I right? They're not frightened of being wrong.
I don't mean to say that being wrong is the same thing as being creative.
What we do know is, if you're not prepared to be wrong, you'll never come up with anything original -- if you're not prepared to be wrong.
And by the time they get to be adults, most kids have lost that capacity.
They have become frightened of being wrong.
And we run our companies like this.
We stigmatize mistakes.
And we're now running national education systems where mistakes are the worst thing you can make.
And the result is that we are educating people out of their creative capacities.
Picasso once said this, he said that all children are born artists.
The problem is to remain an artist as we grow up.
I believe this passionately, that we don't grow into creativity, we grow out of it.
Or rather, we get educated out of it.
So why is this?
I lived in Stratford-on-Avon until about five years ago.
In fact, we moved from Stratford to Los Angeles.
So you can imagine what a seamless transition this was.
Actually, we lived in a place called Snitterfield, just outside Stratford, which is where Shakespeare's father was born.
Are you struck by a new thought? I was.
You don't think of Shakespeare having a father, do you?
Do you?
Because you don't think of Shakespeare being a child, do you?
Shakespeare being seven?
I mean, he was seven at some point.
He was in somebody's English class, wasn't he?
How annoying would that be?
Must try harder.
Being sent to bed by his dad, to Shakespeare, Go to bed, now!
To William Shakespeare.
And put the pencil down!
It's confusing everybody.
Anyway, we moved from Stratford to Los Angeles, and I just want to say a word about the transition.
Actually, my son didn't want to come.
I've got two kids he's 21 now, my daughter's 16.
He didn't want to come to Los Angeles.
He loved it, but he had a girlfriend in England.
This was the love of his life, Sarah.
He'd known her for a month.
Mind you, they'd had their fourth anniversary, because it's a long time when you're 16.
He was really upset on the plane.
He said, I'll never find another girl like Sarah.
And we were rather pleased about that, frankly --  because she was the main reason we were leaving the country.
But something strikes you when you move to America and travel around the world every education system on earth has the same hierarchy of subjects.
Every one. Doesn't matter where you go.
You'd think it would be otherwise, but it isn't.
At the top are mathematics and languages, then the humanities.
At the bottom are the arts. Everywhere on earth.
And in pretty much every system, too, there's a hierarchy within the arts.
Art and music are normally given a higher status in schools than drama and dance.
There isn't an education system on the planet that teaches dance every day to children the way we teach them mathematics.
Why?
I think this is rather important.
I think math is very important, but so is dance.
Children dance all the time if they're allowed to, we all do.
We all have bodies, don't we? Did I miss a meeting?
Truthfully, what happens is, as children grow up, we start to educate them progressively from the waist up.
And slightly to one side.
If you were to visit education as an alien and say What's it for, public education?
I think you'd have to conclude, if you look at the output, who really succeeds by this, who does everything they should, who gets all the brownie points, who are the winners -- I think you'd have to conclude the whole purpose of public education throughout the world is to produce university professors.
Isn't it?
They're the people who come out the top.
And I used to be one, so there.
And I like university professors, but, you know, we shouldn't hold them up as the high-water mark of all human achievement.
They're just a form of life.
Another form of life.
But they're rather curious.
And I say this out of affection for them there's something curious about professors.
In my experience -- not all of them, but typically -- they live in their heads.
They live up there and slightly to one side.
They're disembodied, you know, in a kind of literal way.
They look upon their body as a form of transport for their heads.
Don't they?
It's a way of getting their head to meetings.
If you want real evidence of out-of-body experiences, by the way, get yourself along to a residential conference of senior academics and pop into the discotheque on the final night.
And there, you will see it.
Grown men and women writhing uncontrollably, off the beat.
Waiting until it ends, so they can go home and write a paper about it.
Our education system is predicated on the idea of academic ability.
And there's a reason.
Around the world, there were no public systems of education, really, before the 19th century.
They all came into being to meet the needs of industrialism.
So the hierarchy is rooted on two ideas.
Number one, that the most useful subjects for work are at the top.
So you were probably steered benignly away from things at school when you were a kid, things you liked, on the grounds you would never get a job doing that.
Is that right?
Don't do music, you're not going to be a musician don't do art, you won't be an artist.
Benign advice -- now, profoundly mistaken.
The whole world is engulfed in a revolution.
And the second is academic ability, which has really come to dominate our view of intelligence, because the universities design the system in their image.
If you think of it, the whole system of public education around the world is a protracted process of university entrance.
And the consequence is that many highly talented, brilliant, creative people think they're not, because the thing they were good at at school wasn't valued, or was actually stigmatized.
And I think we can't afford to go on that way.
In the next 30 years, according to UNESCO, more people worldwide will be graduating through education than since the beginning of history.
More people.
And it's the combination of all the things we've talked about technology and its transformational effect on work, and demography and the huge explosion in population.
Suddenly, degrees aren't worth anything.
Isn't that true?
When I was a student, if you had a degree, you had a job.
If you didn't have a job, it's because you didn't want one.
And I didn't want one, frankly.
But now kids with degrees are often heading home to carry on playing video games, because you need an MA where the previous job required a BA, and now you need a PhD for the other.
It's a process of academic inflation.
And it indicates the whole structure of education is shifting beneath our feet.
We need to radically rethink our view of intelligence.
We know three things about intelligence.
One, it's diverse.
We think about the world in all the ways that we experience it.
We think in abstract terms, we think in movement.
Secondly, intelligence is dynamic.
If you look at the interactions of a human brain, as we heard yesterday from a number of presentations, intelligence is wonderfully interactive.
The brain isn't divided into compartments.
In fact, creativity -- which I define as the process of having original ideas that have value -- more often than not comes about through the interaction of different disciplinary ways of seeing things.
By the way, there's a shaft of nerves that joins the two halves of the brain, called the corpus callosum.
It's thicker in women.
Following off from Helen yesterday, this is probably why women are better at multitasking.
Because you are, aren't you?
There's a raft of research, but I know it from my personal life.
If my wife is cooking a meal at home, which is not often ...
thankfully.
No, she's good at some things.
But if she's cooking, she's dealing with people on the phone, she's talking to the kids, she's painting the ceiling --  she's doing open-heart surgery over here.
If I'm cooking, the door is shut, the kids are out, the phone's on the hook, if she comes in, I get annoyed.
I say, Terry, please, I'm trying to fry an egg in here.
Give me a break.
Actually, do you know that old philosophical thing, If a tree falls in a forest, and nobody hears it, did it happen?
Remember that old chestnut?
I saw a great T-shirt recently, which said, If a man speaks his mind in a forest, and no woman hears him, is he still wrong?
And the third thing about intelligence is, it's distinct.
I'm doing a new book at the moment called Epiphany, which is based on a series of interviews with people about how they discovered their talent.
I'm fascinated by how people got to be there.
It's really prompted by a conversation I had with a wonderful woman who maybe most people have never heard of, Gillian Lynne.
Have you heard of her? Some have.
She's a choreographer, and everybody knows her work.
She's wonderful.
I used to be on the board of The Royal Ballet, as you can see.
Gillian and I had lunch one day. I said, How did you get to be a dancer?
It was interesting.
When she was at school, she was really hopeless.
And the school, in the '30s, wrote to her parents and said, We think Gillian has a learning disorder.
She couldn't concentrate she was fidgeting.
I think now they'd say she had ADHD.
Wouldn't you?
But this was the 1930s, and ADHD hadn't been invented at this point.
It wasn't an available condition.
People weren't aware they could have that.
Anyway, she went to see this specialist.
So, this oak-paneled room, and she was there with her mother, and she was led and sat on this chair at the end, and she sat on her hands for 20 minutes, while this man talked to her mother about all the problems Gillian was having at school, because she was disturbing people, her homework was always late, and so on.
In the end, the doctor went and sat next to Gillian and said, I've listened to all these things your mother's told me.
Wait here. We'll be back. We won't be very long, and they went and left her.
But as they went out of the room, he turned on the radio that was sitting on his desk.
And when they got out of the room, he said to her mother, Just stand and watch her.
And the minute they left the room, she was on her feet, moving to the music.
And they watched for a few minutes, and he turned to her mother and said, Mrs. Lynne, Gillian isn't sick.
Take her to a dance school.
I said, What happened?
She said, She did. I can't tell you how wonderful it was.
We walked in this room, and it was full of people like me -- people who couldn't sit still, people who had to move to think.
Who had to move to think.
They did ballet, they did tap, jazz they did modern they did contemporary.
She was eventually auditioned for the Royal Ballet School.
She became a soloist she had a wonderful career at the Royal Ballet.
She eventually graduated from the Royal Ballet School, founded the Gillian Lynne Dance Company, met Andrew Lloyd Webber.
She's been responsible for some of the most successful musical theater productions in history, she's given pleasure to millions, and she's a multimillionaire.
Somebody else might have put her on medication and told her to calm down.
What I think it comes to is this Al Gore spoke the other night about ecology and the revolution that was triggered by Rachel Carson.
I believe our only hope for the future is to adopt a new conception of human ecology, one in which we start to reconstitute our conception of the richness of human capacity.
Our education system has mined our minds in the way that we strip-mine the earth for a particular commodity.
And for the future, it won't serve us.
We have to rethink the fundamental principles on which we're educating our children.
There was a wonderful quote by Jonas Salk, who said, If all the insects were to disappear from the Earth, within 50 years, all life on Earth would end.
If all human beings disappeared from the Earth, within 50 years, all forms of life would flourish.
And he's right.
What TED celebrates is the gift of the human imagination.
We have to be careful now that we use this gift wisely, and that we avert some of the scenarios that we've talked about.
And the only way we'll do it is by seeing our creative capacities for the richness they are and seeing our children for the hope that they are.
And our task is to educate their whole being, so they can face this future.
By the way -- we may not see this future, but they will.
And our job is to help them make something of it.
We grew up interacting with the physical objects around us.
There are an enormous number of them that we use every day.
Unlike most of our computing devices, these objects are much more fun to use.
When you talk about objects, one other thing automatically comes attached to that thing, and that is gestures how we manipulate these objects, how we use these objects in everyday life.
We use gestures not only to interact with these objects, but we also use them to interact with each other.
A gesture of Namaste!, maybe, to respect someone, or maybe, in India I don't need to teach a kid that this means four runs in cricket.
It comes as a part of our everyday learning.
So, I am very interested, from the beginning, how our knowledge about everyday objects and gestures, and how we use these objects, can be leveraged to our interactions with the digital world.
Rather than using a keyboard and mouse, why can I not use my computer in the same way that I interact in the physical world?
So, I started this exploration around eight years back, and it literally started with a mouse on my desk.
Rather than using it for my computer, I actually opened it.
Most of you might be aware that, in those days, the mouse used to come with a ball inside, and there were two rollers that actually guide the computer where the ball is moving, and, accordingly, where the mouse is moving.
So, I was interested in these two rollers, and I actually wanted more, so I borrowed another mouse from a friend -- never returned to him -- and I now had four rollers.
Interestingly, what I did with these rollers is, basically, I took them off of these mouses and then put them in one line.
It had some strings and pulleys and some springs.
What I got is basically a gesture-interface device that actually acts as a motion-sensing device made for two dollars.
So, here, whatever movement I do in my physical world is actually replicated inside the digital world just using this small device that I made, around eight years back, in 2000.
Because I was interested in integrating these two worlds, I thought of sticky notes.
