But we're also perfectly comfortable buying an MP3 player from Apple, or a phone from Apple, or a DVR from Apple.
As I said before, Apple's just a computer company.
Nothing distinguishes them structurally from any of their competitors.
Their competitors are equally qualified to make all of these products.
In fact, they tried.
A few years ago, Gateway came out with flat-screen TVs.
They're eminently qualified to make flat-screen TVs.
They've been making flat-screen monitors for years.
Nobody bought one.
Dell came out with MP3 players and PDAs, and they make great quality products, and they can make perfectly well-designed products -- and nobody bought one.
In fact, talking about it now, we can't even imagine buying an MP3 player from Dell.
Why would you buy one from a computer company?
But we do it every day.
People don't buy what you do they buy why you do it.
The goal is not to do business with everybody who needs what you have.
The goal is to do business with people who believe what you believe.
Here's the best part None of what I'm telling you is my opinion.
It's all grounded in the tenets of biology.
Not psychology, biology.
If you look at a cross-section of the human brain, from the top down, the human brain is actually broken into three major components that correlate perfectly with the golden circle.
Our newest brain, our Homo sapien brain, our neocortex, corresponds with the what level.
The neocortex is responsible for all of our rational and analytical thought and language.
The middle two sections make up our limbic brains, and our limbic brains are responsible for all of our feelings, like trust and loyalty.
It's also responsible for all human behavior, all decision-making, and it has no capacity for language.
In other words, when we communicate from the outside in, yes, people can understand vast amounts of complicated information like features and benefits and facts and figures.
It just doesn't drive behavior.
When we can communicate from the inside out, we're talking directly to the part of the brain that controls behavior, and then we allow people to rationalize it with the tangible things we say and do.
This is where gut decisions come from.
Sometimes you can give somebody all the facts and figures, and they say, I know what all the facts and details say, but it just doesn't feel right.
Why would we use that verb, it doesn't feel right?
Because the part of the brain that controls decision-making doesn't control language.
The best we can muster up is, I don't know. It just doesn't feel right.
Or sometimes you say you're leading with your heart or soul.
I hate to break it to you, those aren't other body parts controlling your behavior.
It's all happening here in your limbic brain, the part of the brain that controls decision-making and not language.
But if you don't know why you do what you do, and people respond to why you do what you do, then how will you ever get people to vote for you, or buy something from you, or, more importantly, be loyal and want to be a part of what it is that you do.
The goal is not just to sell to people who need what you have the goal is to sell to people who believe what you believe.
The goal is not just to hire people who need a job it's to hire people who believe what you believe.
I always say that, you know, if you hire people just because they can do a job, they'll work for your money, but if they believe what you believe, they'll work for you with blood and sweat and tears.
Nowhere else is there a better example than with the Wright brothers.
Most people don't know about Samuel Pierpont Langley.
And back in the early 20th century, the pursuit of powered man flight was like the dot com of the day.
Everybody was trying it.
And Samuel Pierpont Langley had, what we assume, to be the recipe for success.
Even now, you ask people, Why did your product or why did your company fail?
and people always give you the same permutation of the same three things under-capitalized, the wrong people, bad market conditions.
It's always the same three things, so let's explore that.
Samuel Pierpont Langley was given 50,000 dollars by the War Department to figure out this flying machine.
Money was no problem.
He held a seat at Harvard and worked at the Smithsonian and was extremely well-connected he knew all the big minds of the day.
He hired the best minds money could find and the market conditions were fantastic.
The New York Times followed him around everywhere, and everyone was rooting for Langley.
Then how come we've never heard of Samuel Pierpont Langley?
A few hundred miles away in Dayton, Ohio, Orville and Wilbur Wright, they had none of what we consider to be the recipe for success.
They had no money they paid for their dream with the proceeds from their bicycle shop.
Not a single person on the Wright brothers' team had a college education, not even Orville or Wilbur.
And The New York Times followed them around nowhere.
The difference was, Orville and Wilbur were driven by a cause, by a purpose, by a belief.
They believed that if they could figure out this flying machine, it'll change the course of the world.
Samuel Pierpont Langley was different.
He wanted to be rich, and he wanted to be famous.
He was in pursuit of the result.
He was in pursuit of the riches.
And lo and behold, look what happened.
The people who believed in the Wright brothers' dream worked with them with blood and sweat and tears.
The others just worked for the paycheck.
They tell stories of how every time the Wright brothers went out, they would have to take five sets of parts, because that's how many times they would crash before supper.
And, eventually, on December 17th, 1903, the Wright brothers took flight, and no one was there to even experience it.
We found out about it a few days later.
And further proof that Langley was motivated by the wrong thing the day the Wright brothers took flight, he quit.
He could have said, That's an amazing discovery, guys, and I will improve upon your technology, but he didn't.
He wasn't first, he didn't get rich, he didn't get famous, so he quit.
People don't buy what you do they buy why you do it.
If you talk about what you believe, you will attract those who believe what you believe.
But why is it important to attract those who believe what you believe?
Something called the law of diffusion of innovation, if you don't know the law, you know the terminology.
The first 2.5 of our population are our innovators.
The next 13.5 of our population are our early adopters.
The next 34 are your early majority, your late majority and your laggards.
The only reason these people buy touch-tone phones is because you can't buy rotary phones anymore.
We all sit at various places at various times on this scale, but what the law of diffusion of innovation tells us is that if you want mass-market success or mass-market acceptance of an idea, you cannot have it until you achieve this tipping point between 15 and 18 percent market penetration, and then the system tips.
I love asking businesses, What's your conversion on new business?
They love to tell you, It's about 10 percent, proudly.
Well, you can trip over 10 of the customers.
We all have about 10 who just get it.
That's how we describe them, right?
That's like that gut feeling, Oh, they just get it.
The problem is How do you find the ones that get it before doing business versus the ones who don't get it?
So it's this here, this little gap that you have to close, as Jeffrey Moore calls it, Crossing the Chasm -- because, you see, the early majority will not try something until someone else has tried it first.
And these guys, the innovators and the early adopters, they're comfortable making those gut decisions.
They're more comfortable making those intuitive decisions that are driven by what they believe about the world and not just what product is available.
These are the people who stood in line for six hours to buy an iPhone when they first came out, when you could have bought one off the shelf the next week.
These are the people who spent 40,000 dollars on flat-screen TVs when they first came out, even though the technology was substandard.
And, by the way, they didn't do it because the technology was so great they did it for themselves.
It's because they wanted to be first.
People don't buy what you do they buy why you do it and what you do simply proves what you believe.
In fact, people will do the things that prove what they believe.
The reason that person bought the iPhone in the first six hours, stood in line for six hours, was because of what they believed about the world, and how they wanted everybody to see them they were first.
People don't buy what you do they buy why you do it.
So let me give you a famous example, a famous failure and a famous success of the law of diffusion of innovation.
First, the famous failure.
It's a commercial example.
As we said before, the recipe for success is money and the right people and the right market conditions.
You should have success then.
Look at TiVo.
From the time TiVo came out about eight or nine years ago to this current day, they are the single highest-quality product on the market, hands down, there is no dispute.
They were extremely well-funded.
Market conditions were fantastic.
I TiVo stuff on my piece-of-junk Time Warner DVR all the time.
But TiVo's a commercial failure.
They've never made money.
And when they went IPO, their stock was at about 30 or 40 dollars and then plummeted, and it's never traded above 10.
In fact, I don't think it's even traded above six, except for a couple of little spikes.
Because you see, when TiVo launched their product, they told us all what they had.
They said, We have a product that pauses live TV, skips commercials, rewinds live TV and memorizes your viewing habits without you even asking.
And the cynical majority said, We don't believe you.
We don't need it. We don't like it.
You're scaring us.
What if they had said, If you're the kind of person who likes to have total control over every aspect of your life, boy, do we have a product for you.
It pauses live TV, skips commercials, memorizes your viewing habits, etc., etc.
People don't buy what you do they buy why you do it, and what you do simply serves as the proof of what you believe.
Now let me give you a successful example of the law of diffusion of innovation.
In the summer of 1963, 250,000 people showed up on the mall in Washington to hear Dr. King speak.
They sent out no invitations, and there was no website to check the date.
How do you do that?
Well, Dr. King wasn't the only man in America who was a great orator.
He wasn't the only man in America who suffered in a pre-civil rights America.
In fact, some of his ideas were bad.
But he had a gift.
He didn't go around telling people what needed to change in America.
He went around and told people what he believed.
I believe, I believe, I believe, he told people.
And people who believed what he believed took his cause, and they made it their own, and they told people.
And some of those people created structures to get the word out to even more people.
And lo and behold, 250,000 people showed up on the right day at the right time to hear him speak.
How many of them showed up for him?
Zero.
They showed up for themselves.
It's what they believed about America that got them to travel in a bus for eight hours to stand in the sun in Washington in the middle of August.
It's what they believed, and it wasn't about black versus white 25 of the audience was white.
Dr. King believed that there are two types of laws in this world those that are made by a higher authority and those that are made by men.
And not until all the laws that are made by men are consistent with the laws made by the higher authority will we live in a just world.
It just so happened that the Civil Rights Movement was the perfect thing to help him bring his cause to life.
We followed, not for him, but for ourselves.
By the way, he gave the I have a dream speech, not the I have a plan speech.
Listen to politicians now, with their comprehensive 12-point plans.
They're not inspiring anybody.
Because there are leaders and there are those who lead.
Leaders hold a position of power or authority, but those who lead inspire us.
Whether they're individuals or organizations, we follow those who lead, not because we have to, but because we want to.
We follow those who lead, not for them, but for ourselves.
And it's those who start with why that have the ability to inspire those around them or find others who inspire them.
I have a daughter, Mulan.
And when she was eight, last year, she was doing a report for school or she had some homework about frogs.
And we were at this restaurant, and she said, So, basically, frogs lay eggs and the eggs turn into tadpoles, and tadpoles turn into frogs.
And I said, Yeah. You know, I'm not really up on my frog reproduction that much.
It's the females, I think, that lay the eggs, and then the males fertilize them.
And then they become tadpoles and frogs.
And she says, What? Only the females have eggs?
And I said, Yeah.
And she goes, And what's this fertilizing?
So I kind of said, Oh, it's this extra ingredient, you know, that you need to create a new frog from the mom and dad frog.  And she said, Oh, so is that true for humans too?
And I thought, Okay, here we go.
I didn't know it would happen so quick, at eight.
I was trying to remember all the guidebooks, and all I could remember was, Only answer the question they're asking.
Don't give any more information.  So I said, Yes.
And she said, And where do, um, where do human women, like, where do women lay their eggs?
And I said, Well, funny you should ask.  We have evolved to have our own pond.
We have our very own pond inside our bodies.
And we lay our eggs there, we don't have to worry about other eggs or anything like that.
It's our own pond. And that's how it happens.
And she goes, Then how do they get fertilized?
And I said, Well, Men, through their penis, they fertilize the eggs by the sperm coming out.
And you go through the woman's vagina.
And so we're just eating, and her jaw just drops, and she goes, Mom!
Like, where you go to the bathroom?
And I said, I know.
I know.
That's how we evolved. It does seem odd.
It is a little bit like having a waste treatment plant right next to an amusement park ...
Bad zoning, but ...  She's like, What? And she goes, But Mom, but men and women can't ever see each other naked, Mom.
So how could that ever happen?
And then I go, Well, and then I put my Margaret Mead hat on.
Human males and females develop a special bond, and when they're much older, much, much older than you, and they have a very special feeling, then they can be naked together.
And she said, Mom, have you done this before?
And I said, Yes.
And she said, But Mom, you can't have kids.
Because she knows that I adopted her and that I can't have kids.
And she said, Well, you don't have to do that again.
And I said, ...
And then she said, But how does it happen when a man and woman are together?
Like, how do they know that's the time?
Mom, does the man just say, 'Is now the time to take off my pants?'  And I said, Yes.
That is exactly right.
That's exactly how it happens.
So we're driving home and she's looking out the window, and she goes, Mom. What if two just people saw each other on the street, like a man and a woman, they just started doing it. Would that ever happen?
And I said, Oh, no. Humans are so private.
Oh ...
And then she goes, What if there was like a party, and there was just like a whole bunch of girls and a whole bunch of boys, and there was a bunch of men and women and they just started doing it, Mom?
Would that ever happen?
And I said, Oh, no, no.
That's not how we do it.
Then we got home and we see the cat. And she goes, Mom, how do cats do it?
And I go, Oh, it's the same. It's basically the same.
And then she got all caught up in the legs. But how would the legs go, Mom?
I don't understand the legs.
She goes, Mom, everyone can't do the splits.
And I go, I know, but the legs ...
and I'm probably like, The legs get worked out.
And she goes, But I just can't understand it.
So I go, You know, why don't we go on the Internet, and maybe we can see ... like on Wikipedia.  So we go online, and we put in cats mating.
And, unfortunately, on YouTube, there's many cats mating videos.
And we watched them and I'm so thankful, because she's just like, Wow! This is so amazing.
She goes, What about dogs?
So we put in dogs mating, and, you know, we're watching it, and she's totally absorbed.
And then she goes, Mom, do you think they would have, on the Internet, any humans mating?
And then I realized that I had taken my little eight year old's hand, and taken her right into Internet porn.  And I looked into this trusting, loving face, and I said, Oh, no.
That would never happen.
Thank you.
Thank you. I'm so happy to be here.
About a year ago, I asked myself a question Knowing what I know, why am I not a vegetarian?
After all, I'm one of the green guys I grew up with hippie parents in a log cabin.
I started a site called TreeHugger -- I care about this stuff.
I knew that eating a mere hamburger a day can increase my risk of dying by a third.
Cruelty I knew that the 10 billion animals we raise each year for meat are raised in factory farm conditions that we, hypocritically, wouldn't even consider for our own cats, dogs and other pets.
Environmentally, meat, amazingly, causes more emissions than all of transportation combined cars, trains, planes, buses, boats, all of it.
And beef production uses 100 times the water that most vegetables do.
I also knew that I'm not alone.
We as a society are eating twice as much meat as we did in the 50s.
So what was once the special little side treat now is the main, much more regular.
So really, any of these angles should have been enough to convince me to go vegetarian.
Yet, there I was -- chk, chk, chk -- tucking into a big old steak.
So why was I stalling?
I realized that what I was being pitched was a binary solution.
It was either you're a meat eater or you're a vegetarian, and I guess I just wasn't quite ready.
Imagine your last hamburger.
So my common sense, my good intentions, were in conflict with my taste buds.
And I'd commit to doing it later, and not surprisingly, later never came.
Sound familiar?
So I wondered, might there be a third solution?
And I thought about it, and I came up with one.
I've been doing it for the last year, and it's great.
It's called weekday veg.
The name says it all Nothing with a face Monday through Friday.
On the weekend, your choice.
Simple.
If you want to take it to the next level, remember, the major culprits in terms of environmental damage and health are red and processed meats.
So you want to swap those out with some good, sustainably harvested fish.
It's structured, so it ends up being simple to remember, and it's okay to break it here and there.
After all, cutting five days a week is cutting 70 percent of your meat intake.
The program has been great, weekday veg.
My footprint's smaller, I'm lessening pollution, I feel better about the animals, I'm even saving money.
Best of all, I'm healthier, I know that I'm going to live longer, and I've even lost a little weight.
So, please ask yourselves, for your health, for your pocketbook, for the environment, for the animals What's stopping you from giving weekday veg a shot?
After all, if all of us ate half as much meat, it would be like half of us were vegetarians.
We live in difficult and challenging economic times, of course.
And one of the first victims of difficult economic times, I think, is public spending of any kind, but certainly in the firing line at the moment is public spending for science, and particularly curiosity-led science and exploration.
So I want to try and convince you in about 15 minutes that that's a ridiculous and ludicrous thing to do.
But I think to set the scene, I want to show -- the next slide is not my attempt to show the worst TED slide in the history of TED, but it is a bit of a mess.
But actually, it's not my fault it's from the Guardian newspaper.
And it's actually a beautiful demonstration of how much science costs.
Because, if I'm going to make the case for continuing to spend on curiosity-driven science and exploration, I should tell you how much it costs.
So this is a game called spot the science budgets.
This is the U.K. government spend.
You see there, it's about 620 billion a year.
The science budget is actually -- if you look to your left, there's a purple set of blobs and then yellow set of blobs.
And it's one of the yellow set of blobs around the big yellow blob.
It's about 3.3 billion pounds per year out of 620 billion.
That funds everything in the U.K.
from medical research, space exploration, where I work, at CERN in Geneva, particle physics, engineering, even arts and humanities, funded from the science budget, which is that 3.3 billion, that little, tiny yellow blob around the orange blob at the top left of the screen.
So that's what we're arguing about.
That percentage, by the way, is about the same in the U.S. and Germany and France.
RampampD in total in the economy, publicly funded, is about 0.6 percent of GDP.
The first thing I want to say, and this is straight from Wonders of the Solar System, is that our exploration of the solar system and the universe has shown us that it is indescribably beautiful.
This is a picture that actually was sent back by the Cassini space probe around Saturn, after we'd finished filming Wonders of the Solar System.
So it isn't in the series.
It's of the moon Enceladus.
So that big sweeping, white sphere in the corner is Saturn, which is actually in the background of the picture.
And that crescent there is the moon Enceladus, which is about as big as the British Isles.
It's about 500 kilometers in diameter.
So, tiny moon.
What's fascinating and beautiful ...
this an unprocessed picture, by the way, I should say, it's black and white, straight from Saturnian orbit.
What's beautiful is, you can probably see on the limb there some faint, sort of, wisps of almost smoke rising up from the limb.
This is how we visualize that in Wonders of the Solar System.
It's a beautiful graphic.
What we found out were that those faint wisps are actually fountains of ice rising up from the surface of this tiny moon.
That's fascinating and beautiful in itself, but we think that the mechanism for powering those fountains requires there to be lakes of liquid water beneath the surface of this moon.
And what's important about that is that, on our planet, on Earth, wherever we find liquid water, we find life.
So, to find strong evidence of liquid, pools of liquid, beneath the surface of a moon 750 million miles away from the Earth is really quite astounding.
So what we're saying, essentially, is maybe that's a habitat for life in the solar system.
Well, let me just say, that was a graphic. I just want to show this picture.
That's one more picture of Enceladus.
This is when Cassini flew beneath Enceladus.
So it made a very low pass, just a few hundred kilometers above the surface.
And so this, again, a real picture of the ice fountains rising up into space, absolutely beautiful.
But that's not the prime candidate for life in the solar system.
That's probably this place, which is a moon of Jupiter, Europa.
And again, we had to fly to the Jovian system to get any sense that this moon, as most moons, was anything other than a dead ball of rock.
It's actually an ice moon.
So what you're looking at is the surface of the moon Europa, which is a thick sheet of ice, probably a hundred kilometers thick.
But by measuring the way that Europa interacts with the magnetic field of Jupiter, and looking at how those cracks in the ice that you can see there on that graphic move around, we've inferred very strongly that there's an ocean of liquid surrounding the entire surface of Europa.
So below the ice, there's an ocean of liquid around the whole moon.
It could be hundreds of kilometers deep, we think.
We think it's saltwater, and that would mean that there's more water on that moon of Jupiter than there is in all the oceans of the Earth combined.
So that place, a little moon around Jupiter, is probably the prime candidate for finding life on a moon or a body outside the Earth, that we know of.
Tremendous and beautiful discovery.
Our exploration of the solar system has taught us that the solar system is beautiful.
It may also have pointed the way to answering one of the most profound questions that you can possibly ask, which is Are we alone in the universe?
Is there any other use to exploration and science, other than just a sense of wonder?
Well, there is.
This is a very famous picture taken, actually, on my first Christmas Eve, December 24th, 1968, when I was about eight months old.
It was taken by Apollo 8 as it went around the back of the moon.
Earthrise from Apollo 8.
A famous picture many people have said that it's the picture that saved 1968, which was a turbulent year -- the student riots in Paris, the height of the Vietnam War.
The reason many people think that about this picture, and Al Gore has said it many times, actually, on the stage at TED, is that this picture, arguably, was the beginning of the environmental movement.
Because, for the first time, we saw our world, not as a solid, immovable, kind of indestructible place, but as a very small, fragile-looking world just hanging against the blackness of space.
What's also not often said about the space exploration, about the Apollo program, is the economic contribution it made.
I mean while you can make arguments that it was wonderful and a tremendous achievement and delivered pictures like this, it cost a lot, didn't it?
Well, actually, many studies have been done about the economic effectiveness, the economic impact of Apollo.
The biggest one was in 1975 by Chase Econometrics.
And it showed that for every 1 spent on Apollo, 14 came back into the U.S. economy.
So the Apollo program paid for itself in inspiration, in engineering, achievement and, I think, in inspiring young scientists and engineers 14 times over.
So exploration can pay for itself.
What about scientific discovery?
What about driving innovation?
Well, this looks like a picture of virtually nothing.
What it is, is a picture of the spectrum of hydrogen.
See, back in the 1880s, 1890s, many scientists, many observers, looked at the light given off from atoms.
And they saw strange pictures like this.
What you're seeing when you put it through a prism is that you heat hydrogen up and it doesn't just glow like a white light, it just emits light at particular colors, a red one, a light blue one, some dark blue ones.
Now that led to an understanding of atomic structure because the way that's explained is atoms are a single nucleus with electrons going around them.
And the electrons can only be in particular places.
And when they jump up to the next place they can be, and fall back down again, they emit light at particular colors.
And so the fact that atoms, when you heat them up, only emit light at very specific colors, was one of the key drivers that led to the development of the quantum theory, the theory of the structure of atoms.
I just wanted to show this picture because this is remarkable.
This is actually a picture of the spectrum of the Sun.
And now, this is a picture of atoms in the Sun's atmosphere absorbing light.
And again, they only absorb light at particular colors when electrons jump up and fall down, jump up and fall down.
But look at the number of black lines in that spectrum.
And the element helium was discovered just by staring at the light from the Sun because some of those black lines were found that corresponded to no known element.
And that's why helium's called helium.
It's called helios -- helios from the Sun.
Now, that sounds esoteric, and indeed it was an esoteric pursuit, but the quantum theory quickly led to an understanding of the behaviors of electrons in materials like silicon, for example.
The way that silicon behaves, the fact that you can build transistors, is a purely quantum phenomenon.
So without that curiosity-driven understanding of the structure of atoms, which led to this rather esoteric theory, quantum mechanics, then we wouldn't have transistors, we wouldn't have silicon chips, we wouldn't have pretty much the basis of our modern economy.
There's one more, I think, wonderful twist to that tale.
In Wonders of the Solar System, we kept emphasizing the laws of physics are universal.
It's one of the most incredible things about the physics and the understanding of nature that you get on Earth, is you can transport it, not only to the planets, but to the most distant stars and galaxies.
And one of the astonishing predictions of quantum mechanics, just by looking at the structure of atoms -- the same theory that describes transistors -- is that there can be no stars in the universe that have reached the end of their life that are bigger than, quite specifically, 1.4 times the mass of the Sun.
That's a limit imposed on the mass of stars.
You can work it out on a piece of paper in a laboratory, get a telescope, swing it to the sky, and you find that there are no dead stars bigger than 1.4 times the mass of the Sun.
That's quite an incredible prediction.
What happens when you have a star that's right on the edge of that mass?
Well, this is a picture of it.
This is the picture of a galaxy, a common our garden galaxy with, what, 100 billion stars like our Sun in it.
It's just one of billions of galaxies in the universe.
There are a billion stars in the galactic core, which is why it's shining out so brightly.
This is about 50 million light years away, so one of our neighboring galaxies.
But that bright star there is actually one of the stars in the galaxy.
So that star is also 50 million light years away.
It's part of that galaxy, and it's shining as brightly as the center of the galaxy with a billion suns in it.
That's a Type Ia supernova explosion.
Now that's an incredible phenomena, because it's a star that sits there.
It's called a carbon-oxygen dwarf.
It sits there about, say, 1.3 times the mass of the Sun.
And it has a binary companion that goes around it, so a big star, a big ball of gas.
And what it does is it sucks gas off its companion star, until it gets to this limit called the Chandrasekhar limit, and then it explodes.
And it explodes, and it shines as brightly as a billion suns for about two weeks, and releases, not only energy, but a huge amount of chemical elements into the universe.
In fact, that one is a carbon-oxygen dwarf.
Now, there was no carbon and oxygen in the universe at the Big Bang.
And there was no carbon and oxygen in the universe throughout the first generation of stars.
It was made in stars like that, locked away and then returned to the universe in explosions like that in order to recondense into planets, stars, new solar systems and, indeed, people like us.
I think that's a remarkable demonstration of the power and beauty and universality of the laws of physics, because we understand that process, because we understand the structure of atoms here on Earth.
This is a beautiful quote that I found -- we're talking about serendipity there -- from Alexander Fleming When I woke up just after dawn on September 28, 1928, I certainly didn't plan to revolutionize all medicine by discovering the world's first antibiotic.
Now, the explorers of the world of the atom did not intend to invent the transistor.
And they certainly didn't intend to describe the mechanics of supernova explosions, which eventually told us where the building blocks of life were synthesized in the universe.
So, I think science can be -- serendipity is important.
It can be beautiful. It can reveal quite astonishing things.
It can also, I think, finally reveal the most profound ideas to us about our place in the universe and really the value of our home planet.
This is a spectacular picture of our home planet.
Now, it doesn't look like our home planet.
It looks like Saturn because, of course, it is.
It was taken by the Cassini space probe.
But it's a famous picture, not because of the beauty and majesty of Saturn's rings, but actually because of a tiny, faint blob just hanging underneath one of the rings.
And if I blow it up there, you see it.
It looks like a moon, but in fact, it's a picture of Earth.
It was a picture of Earth captured in that frame of Saturn.
That's our planet from 750 million miles away.
I think the Earth has got a strange property that the farther away you get from it, the more beautiful it seems.
But that is not the most distant or most famous picture of our planet.
It was taken by this thing, which is called the Voyager spacecraft.
And that's a picture of me in front of it for scale.
The Voyager is a tiny machine.
It's currently 10 billion miles away from Earth, transmitting with that dish, with the power of 20 watts, and we're still in contact with it.
But it visited Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
And after it visited all four of those planets, Carl Sagan, who's one of my great heroes, had the wonderful idea of turning Voyager around and taking a picture of every planet it had visited.
And it took this picture of Earth.
Now it's very hard to see the Earth there, it's called the Pale Blue Dot picture, but Earth is suspended in that red shaft of light.
That's Earth from four billion miles away.
And I'd like to read you what Sagan wrote about it, just to finish, because I cannot say words as beautiful as this to describe what he saw in that picture that he had taken.
He said, Consider again that dot.
That's here. That's home. That's us.
On it, everyone you love, everyone you know, everyone you've ever heard of, every human being who ever was lived out their lives.
The aggregates of joy and suffering thousands of confident religions, ideologies and economic doctrines, every hunter and forager, every hero and coward, every creator and destroyer of civilization, every king and peasant, every young couple in love, every mother and father, hopeful child, inventor and explorer, every teacher of morals, every corrupt politician, every superstar, every supreme leader, every saint and sinner in the history of our species, lived there, on a mote of dust, suspended in a sunbeam.
It's been said that astronomy's a humbling and character-building experience.
There is perhaps no better demonstration of the folly of human conceits than this distant image of our tiny world.
To me, it underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home we've ever known.
Beautiful words about the power of science and exploration.
The argument has always been made, and it will always be made, that we know enough about the universe.
You could have made it in the 1920s you wouldn't have had penicillin.
You could have made it in the 1890s you wouldn't have the transistor.
And it's made today in these difficult economic times.
Surely, we know enough.
We don't need to discover anything else about our universe.
Let me leave the last words to someone who's rapidly becoming a hero of mine, Humphrey Davy, who did his science at the turn of the 19th century.
He was clearly under assault all the time.
We know enough at the turn of the 19th century.
Just exploit it just build things.
He said this, he said, Nothing is more fatal to the progress of the human mind than to presume that our views of science are ultimate, that our triumphs are complete, that there are no mysteries in nature, and that there are no new worlds to conquer.
When I was 10 years old, a cousin of mine took me on a tour of his medical school.
And as a special treat, he took me to the pathology lab and took a real human brain out of the jar and placed it in my hands.
And there it was, the seat of human consciousness, the powerhouse of the human body, sitting in my hands.
And that day I knew that when I grew up, I was going to become a brain doctor, scientist, something or the other.
Years later, when I finally grew up, my dream came true.
And it was while I was doing my Ph.D.
on the neurological causes of dyslexia in children that I encountered a startling fact that I'd like to share with you all today.
It is estimated that one in six children, that's one in six children, suffer from some developmental disorder.
This is a disorder that retards mental development in the child and causes permanent mental impairments.
Which means that each and every one of you here today knows at least one child that is suffering from a developmental disorder.
But here's what really perplexed me.
Despite the fact that each and every one of these disorders originates in the brain, most of these disorders are diagnosed solely on the basis of observable behavior.
But diagnosing a brain disorder without actually looking at the brain is analogous to treating a patient with a heart problem based on their physical symptoms, without even doing an ECG or a chest X-ray to look at the heart.
It seemed so intuitive to me.
To diagnose and treat a brain disorder accurately, it would be necessary to look at the brain directly.
Looking at behavior alone can miss a vital piece of the puzzle and provide an incomplete, or even a misleading, picture of the child's problems.
Yet, despite all the advances in medical technology, the diagnosis of brain disorders in one in six children still remained so limited.
And then I came across a team at Harvard University that had taken one such advanced medical technology and finally applied it, instead of in brain research, towards diagnosing brain disorders in children.
Their groundbreaking technology records the EEG, or the electrical activity of the brain, in real time, allowing us to watch the brain as it performs various functions and then detect even the slightest abnormality in any of these functions vision, attention, language, audition.
A program called Brain Electrical Activity Mapping then triangulates the source of that abnormality in the brain.
And another program called Statistical Probability Mapping then performs mathematical calculations to determine whether any of these abnormalities are clinically significant, allowing us to provide a much more accurate neurological diagnosis of the child's symptoms.
And so I became the head of neurophysiology for the clinical arm of this team, and we're finally able to use this technology towards actually helping children with brain disorders.
And I'm happy to say that I'm now in the process of setting up this technology here in India.
I'd like to tell you about one such child, whose story was also covered by ABC News.
Seven-year-old Justin Senigar came to our clinic with this diagnosis of very severe autism.
Like many autistic children, his mind was locked inside his body.
There were moments when he would actually space out for seconds at a time.
And the doctors told his parents he was never going to be able to communicate or interact socially, and he would probably never have too much language.
When we used this groundbreaking EEG technology to actually look at Justin's brain, the results were startling.
It turned out that Justin was almost certainly not autistic.
He was suffering from brain seizures that were impossible to see with the naked eye, but that were actually causing symptoms that mimicked those of autism.
After Justin was given anti-seizure medication, the change in him was amazing.
Within a period of 60 days, his vocabulary went from two to three words to 300 words.
And his communication and social interaction were improved so dramatically that he was enrolled into a regular school and even became a karate super champ.
Research shows that 50 percent of children, almost 50 percent of children diagnosed with autism are actually suffering from hidden brain seizures.
These are the faces of the children that I have tested with stories just like Justin.
All these children came to our clinic with a diagnosis of autism, attention deficit disorder, mental retardation, language problems.
Instead, our EEG scans revealed very specific problems hidden within their brains that couldn't possibly have been detected by their behavioral assessments.
So these EEG scans enabled us to provide these children with a much more accurate neurological diagnosis and much more targeted treatment.
For too long now, children with developmental disorders have suffered from misdiagnosis while their real problems have gone undetected and left to worsen.
And for too long, these children and their parents have suffered undue frustration and desperation.
But we are now in a new era of neuroscience, one in which we can finally look directly at brain function in real time with no risks and no side effects, non-invasively, and find the true source of so many disabilities in children.
So if I could inspire even a fraction of you in the audience today to share this pioneering diagnostic approach with even one parent whose child is suffering from a developmental disorder, then perhaps one more puzzle in one more brain will be solved.
One more mind will be unlocked.
And one more child who has been misdiagnosed or even undiagnosed by the system will finally realize his or her true potential while there's still time for his or her brain to recover.
And all this by simply watching the child's brainwaves.
It's a great honor today to share with you The Digital Universe, which was created for humanity to really see where we are in the universe.
And so I think we can roll the video that we have.
The Himalayas. Music The flat horizon that we've evolved with has been a metaphor for the infinite unbounded resources and unlimited capacity for disposal of waste.
It wasn't until we really left Earth, got above the atmosphere and had seen the horizon bend back on itself, that we could understand our planet as a limited condition.
The Digital Universe Atlas has been built at the American Museum of Natural History over the past 12 years.
We maintain that, put that together as a project to really chart the universe across all scales.
What we see here are satellites around the Earth and the Earth in proper registration against the universe, as we see.
NASA supported this work 12 years ago as part of the rebuilding of the Hayden Planetarium so that we would share this with the world.
The Digital Universe is the basis of our space show productions that we do -- our main space shows in the dome.
But what you see here is the result of, actually, internships that we hosted with Linkoping University in Sweden.
I've had 12 students work on this for their graduate work, and the result has been this software called Uniview and a company called SCISS in Sweden.
This software allows interactive use, so this actual flight path and movie that we see here was actually flown live.
I captured this live from my laptop in a cafe called Earth Matters on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, where I live, and it was done as a collaborative project with the Rubin Museum of Himalayan Art for an exhibit on comparative cosmology.
And so as we move out, we see continuously from our planet all the way out into the realm of galaxies, as we see here, light-travel time, giving you a sense of how far away we are.
As we move out, the light from these distant galaxies have taken so long, we're essentially backing up into the past.
We back so far up we're finally seeing a containment around us -- the afterglow of the Big Bang.
This is the WMAP microwave background that we see.
We'll fly outside it here, just to see this sort of containment.
If we were outside this, it would almost be meaningless, in the sense as before time.
But this our containment of the visible universe.
We know the universe is bigger than that which we can see.
Coming back quickly, we see here the radio sphere that we jumped out of in the beginning, but these are positions, the latest positions of exoplanets that we've mapped, and our sun here, obviously, with our own solar system.
What you're going to see -- we're going to have to jump in here pretty quickly between several orders of magnitude to get down to where we see the solar system -- these are the paths of Voyager 1, Voyager 2, Pioneer 11 and Pioneer 10, the first four spacecraft to have left the solar system.
Coming in closer, picking up Earth, orbit of the Moon, and we see the Earth.
This map can be updated, and we can add in new data.
I know Dr. Carolyn Porco is the camera P.I.
for the Cassini mission.
But here we see the complex trajectory of the Cassini mission color coded for different mission phases, ingeniously developed so that 45 encounters with the largest moon, Titan, which is larger that the planet Mercury, diverts the orbit into different parts of mission phase.
This software allows us to come close and look at parts of this.
This software can also be networked between domes.
We have a growing user base of this, and we network domes.
And we can network between domes and classrooms.
We're actually sharing tours of the universe with the first sub-Saharan planetarium in Ghana as well as new libraries that have been built in the ghettos in Columbia and a high school in Cambodia.
And the Cambodians have actually controlled the Hayden Planetarium from their high school.
This is an image from Saturday, photographed by the Aqua satellite, but through the Uniview software.
So you're seeing the edge of the Earth.
This is Nepal.
This is, in fact, right here is the valley of Lhasa, right here in Tibet.
But we can see the haze from fires and so forth in the Ganges valley down below in India.
This is Nepal and Tibet.
And just in closing, I'd just like to say this beautiful world that we live on -- here we see a bit of the snow that some of you may have had to brave in coming out -- so I'd like to just say that what the world needs now is a sense of being able to look at ourselves in this much larger condition now and a much larger sense of what home is.
Because our home is the universe, and we are the universe, essentially.
We carry that in us.
And to be able to see our context in this larger sense at all scales helps us all, I think, in understanding where we are and who we are in the universe.
I still remember the day in school when our teacher told us that the world population had become three billion people, and that was in 1960.
I'm going to talk now about how world population has changed from that year and into the future, but I will not use digital technology, as I've done during my first five TEDTalks.
Instead, I have progressed, and I am, today, launching a brand new analog teaching technology that I picked up from IKEA this box.
This box contains one billion people.
And our teacher told us that the industrialized world, 1960, had one billion people.
In the developing world, she said, they had two billion people.
And they lived away then.
There was a big gap between the one billion in the industrialized world and the two billion in the developing world.
In the industrialized world, people were healthy, educated, rich, and they had small families.
And their aspiration was to buy a car.
And in 1960, all Swedes were saving to try to buy a Volvo like this.
This was the economic level at which Sweden was.
But in contrast to this, in the developing world, far away, the aspiration of the average family there was to have food for the day.
They were saving to be able to buy a pair of shoes.
There was an enormous gap in the world when I grew up.
And this gap between the West and the rest has created a mindset of the world, which we still use linguistically when we talk about the West and the Developing World.
But the world has changed, and it's overdue to upgrade that mindset and that taxonomy of the world, and to understand it.
And that's what I'm going to show you, because since 1960 what has happened in the world up to 2010 is that a staggering four billion people have been added to the world population.
Just look how many.
The world population has doubled since I went to school.
And of course, there's been economic growth in the West.
A lot of companies have happened to grow the economy, so the Western population moved over to here.
And now their aspiration is not only to have a car.
Now they want to have a holiday on a very remote destination and they want to fly.
So this is where they are today.
And the most successful of the developing countries, they have moved on, you know, and they have become emerging economies, we call them.
They are now buying cars.
And what happened a month ago was that the Chinese company, Geely, they acquired the Volvo company, and then finally the Swedes understood that something big had happened in the world.
So there they are.
And the tragedy is that the two billion over here that is struggling for food and shoes, they are still almost as poor as they were 50 years ago.
The new thing is that we have the biggest pile of billions, the three billions here, which are also becoming emerging economies, because they are quite healthy, relatively well-educated, and they already also have two to three children per woman, as those richer also have.
And their aspiration now is, of course, to buy a bicycle, and then later on they would like to have a motorbike also.
But this is the world we have today, no longer any gap.
But the distance from the poorest here, the very poorest, to the very richest over here is wider than ever.
But there is a continuous world from walking, biking, driving, flying -- there are people on all levels, and most people tend to be somewhere in the middle.
This is the new world we have today in 2010.
And what will happen in the future?
Well, I'm going to project into 2050.
I was in Shanghai recently, and I listened to what's happening in China, and it's pretty sure that they will catch up, just as Japan did.
All the projections say that this one billion will only grow with one to two or three percent.
But this second grows with seven, eight percent, and then they will end up here.
They will start flying.
And these lower or middle income countries, the emerging income countries, they will also forge forwards economically.
And if, but only if, we invest in the right green technology -- so that we can avoid severe climate change, and energy can still be relatively cheap -- then they will move all the way up here.
And they will start to buy electric cars.
This is what we will find there.
So what about the poorest two billion?
What about the poorest two billion here?
Will they move on?
Well, here population growth comes in because there among emerging economies we already have two to three children per woman, family planning is widely used, and population growth is coming to an end.
Here among the poorest, population is growing.
So these poorest two billion will, in the next decades, increase to three billion, and they will thereafter increase to four billion.
There is nothing -- but a nuclear war of a kind we've never seen -- that can stop this growth from happening.
Because we already have this growth in process.
But if, and only if, the poorest get out of poverty, they get education, they get improved child survival, they can buy a bicycle and a cell phone and come to live here, then population growth will stop in 2050.
We cannot have people on this level looking for food and shoes because then we get continued population growth.
And let me show you why by converting back to the old-time digital technology.
Here I have on the screen my country bubbles.
Every bubble is a country. The size is population.
The colors show the continent.
The yellow on there is the Americas dark blue is Africa brown is Europe green is the Middle East and this light blue is South Asia.
That's India and this is China. Size is population.
Here I have children per woman two children, four children, six children, eight children -- big families, small families.
The year is 1960.
And down here, child survival, the percentage of children surviving childhood up to starting school 60 percent, 70 percent, 80 percent, 90, and almost 100 percent, as we have today in the wealthiest and healthiest countries.
But look, this is the world my teacher talked about in 1960 one billion Western world here -- high child-survival, small families -- and all the rest, the rainbow of developing countries, with very large families and poor child survival.
What has happened? I start the world. Here we go.
Can you see, as the years pass by, child survival is increasing?
They get soap, hygiene, education, vaccination, penicillin and then family planning. Family size is decreasing.
When they get up to 90-percent child survival, then families decrease, and most of the Arab countries in the Middle East is falling down there to small families.
Look, Bangladesh catching up with India.
The whole emerging world joins the Western world with good child survival and small family size, but we still have the poorest billion.
Can you see the poorest billion, those two boxes I had over here?
They are still up here.
And they still have a child survival of only 70 to 80 percent, meaning that if you have six children born, there will be at least four who survive to the next generation.
And the population will double in one generation.
So the only way of really getting world population growth to stop is to continue to improve child survival to 90 percent.
That's why investments by Gates Foundation, UNICEF and aid organizations, together with national government in the poorest countries, are so good because they are actually helping us to reach a sustainable population size of the world.
We can stop at nine billion if we do the right things.
Child survival is the new green.
It's only by child survival that we will stop population growth.
And will it happen?
Well, I'm not an optimist, neither am I a pessimist.
I'm a very serious possibilist.
It's a new category where we take emotion apart, and we just work analytically with the world.
It can be done.
We can have a much more just world.
With green technology and with investments to alleviate poverty, and global governance, the world can become like this.
And look at the position of the old West.
Remember when this blue box was all alone, leading the world, living its own life.
This will not happen again.
The role of the old West in the new world is to become the foundation of the modern world -- nothing more, nothing less.
But it's a very important role.
Do it well and get used to it.

About 10 years ago, I took on the task to teach global development to Swedish undergraduate students.
That was after having spent about 20 years, together with African institutions, studying hunger in Africa.
So I was sort of expected to know a little about the world.
And I started, in our medical university, Karolinska Institute, an undergraduate course called Global Health.
But when you get that opportunity, you get a little nervous.
I thought, these students coming to us actually have the highest grade you can get in the Swedish college system, so I thought, maybe they know everything I'm going to teach them about.
So I did a pretest when they came.
And one of the questions from which I learned a lot was this one Which country has the highest child mortality of these five pairs?
And I put them together so that in each pair of countries, one has twice the child mortality of the other.
And this means that it's much bigger, the difference, than the uncertainty of the data.
I won't put you at a test here, but it's Turkey, which is highest there, Poland, Russia, Pakistan and South Africa.
And these were the results of the Swedish students.
I did it so I got the confidence interval, which is pretty narrow.
And I got happy, of course -- a 1.8 right answer out of five possible.
That means there was a place for a professor of international health and for my course.
But one late night, when I was compiling the report, I really realized my discovery.
I have shown that Swedish top students know, statistically, significantly less about the world than the chimpanzees.
Because the chimpanzee would score half right if I gave them two bananas with Sri Lanka and Turkey.
They would be right half of the cases. But the students are not there.
The problem for me was not ignorance it was preconceived ideas.
I did also an unethical study of the professors of the Karolinska Institute, which hands out the Nobel Prize in Medicine, and they are on par with the chimpanzee there.
This is where I realized that there was really a need to communicate, because the data of what's happening in the world and the child health of every country is very well aware.
This country over here is China.
This is India.
The size of the bubble is the population, and on this axis here, I put fertility rate.
Because my students, what they said when they looked upon the world, and I asked them, What do you really think about the world?
And they said, The world is still 'we' and 'them.' And 'we' is the Western world and 'them' is the Third World.
And what do you mean with 'Western world?' I said.
Well, that's long life and small family.
So this is what I could display here.
I put fertility rate here -- number of children per woman one, two, three, four, up to about eight children per woman.
We have very good data since 1962, 1960, about, on the size of families in all countries.
The error margin is narrow.
Here, I put life expectancy at birth, from 30 years in some countries, up to about 70 years.
And in 1962, there was really a group of countries here that were industrialized countries, and they had small families and long lives.
And these were the developing countries.
Now, what has happened since 1962? We want to see the change.
Are the students right? It's still two types of countries?
Or have these developing countries got smaller families and they live here?
Or have they got longer lives and live up there?
Let's see. We stopped the world then.
This is all UN statistics that have been available.
Here we go. Can you see there?
All the green Latin American countries are moving towards smaller families.
Your yellow ones here are the Arabic countries, and they get longer life, but not larger families.
The Africans are the green here. They still remain here.
This is India Indonesia is moving on pretty fast.
In the '80s here, you have Bangladesh still among the African countries.
But now, Bangladesh -- it's a miracle that happens in the '80s -- the imams start to promote family planning, and they move up into that corner.
And in the '90s, we have the terrible HIV epidemic that takes down the life expectancy of the African countries.
And the rest of them all move up into the corner, where we have long lives and small family, and we have a completely new world.
Applause ends Let me make a comparison directly between the United States of America and Vietnam.
1964 America had small families and long life Vietnam had large families and short lives.
And this is what happens.
The data during the war indicate that even with all the death, there was an improvement of life expectancy.
By the end of the year, family planning started in Vietnam, and they went for smaller families.
And the United States up there is getting longer life, keeping family size.
And in the '80s now, they give up Communist planning and they go for market economy, and it moves faster even than social life.
And today, we have in Vietnam the same life expectancy and the same family size here in Vietnam, 2003, as in United States, 1974, by the end of the war.
I think we all, if we don't look at the data, we underestimate the tremendous change in Asia, which was in social change before we saw the economic change.
So let's move over to another way here in which we could display the distribution in the world of income.
One dollar, 10 dollars or 100 dollars per day.
There's no gap between rich and poor any longer. This is a myth.
There's a little hump here.
But there are people all the way.
And if we look where the income ends up, this is 100 percent of the world's annual income.
And the richest 20 percent, they take out of that about 74 percent.
And the poorest 20 percent, they take about two percent.
And this shows that the concept of developing countries is extremely doubtful.
We think about aid, like these people here giving aid to these people here.
But in the middle, we have most of the world population, and they have now 24 percent of the income.
We heard it in other forms.
And who are these?
I can show you Africa.
This is Africa.
Ten percent of the world population, most in poverty.
This is OECD -- the rich countries, the country club of the UN.
And they are over here on this side. Quite an overlap between Africa and OECD.
And this is Latin America.
It has everything on this earth, from the poorest to the richest in Latin America.
And on top of that, we can put East Europe, we can put East Asia, and we put South Asia.
And what did it look like if we go back in time, to about 1970?
Then, there was more of a hump.
And most who lived in absolute poverty were Asians.
The problem in the world was the poverty in Asia.
And if I now let the world move forward, you will see that while population increases, there are hundreds of millions in Asia getting out of poverty, and some others getting into poverty, and this is the pattern we have today.
And the best projection from the World Bank is that this will happen, and we will not have a divided world.
We'll have most people in the middle.
Of course it's a logarithmic scale here, but our concept of economy is growth with percent.
We look upon it as a possibility of percentile increase.
If I change this and take GDP per capita instead of family income, and I turn these individual data into regional data of gross domestic product, and I take the regions down here, the size of the bubble is still the population.
And you have the OECD there, and you have sub-Saharan Africa there, and we take off the Arab states there, coming both from Africa and from Asia, and we put them separately, and we can expand this axis, and I can give it a new dimension here, by adding the social values there, child survival.
Now I have money on that axis, and I have the possibility of children to survive there.
In some countries, 99.7 of children survive to five years of age others, only 70.
And here, it seems, there is a gap between OECD, Latin America, East Europe, East Asia, Arab states, South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
The linearity is very strong between child survival and money.
But let me split sub-Saharan Africa.
Health is there and better health is up there.
I can go here, and I can split sub-Saharan Africa into its countries.
And when it bursts, the size of each country bubble is the size of the population.
Sierra Leone down there, Mauritius is up there.
Mauritius was the first country to get away with trade barriers, and they could sell their sugar, they could sell their textiles, on equal terms as the people in Europe and North America.
There's a huge difference within Africa.
And Ghana is here in the middle.
Here in Uganda, development aid.
Here, time to invest there, you can go for a holiday.
There's tremendous variation within Africa, which we very often make that it's equal everything.
I can split South Asia here. India's the big bubble in the middle.
But there's a huge difference between Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.
I can split Arab states. How are they?
Same climate, same culture, same religion -- huge difference.
Even between neighbors -- Yemen, civil war United Arab Emirates, money, which was quite equally and well-used.
Not as the myth is.
And that includes all the children of the foreign workers who are in the country.
Data is often better than you think. Many people say data is bad.
There is an uncertainty margin, but we can see the difference here Cambodia, Singapore.
The differences are much bigger than the weakness of the data.
East Europe Soviet economy for a long time, but they come out after 10 years very, very differently.
And there is Latin America.
Today, we don't have to go to Cuba to find a healthy country in Latin America.
Here, we have high-income countries in the OECD.
And we get the whole pattern here of the world, which is more or less like this.
And if we look at it, how the world looks, in 1960, it starts to move.
This is Mao Zedong. He brought health to China.
And then he died.
And then Deng Xiaoping came and brought money to China, and brought them into the mainstream again.
And we have seen how countries move in different directions like this, so it's sort of difficult to get an example country which shows the pattern of the world.
But I would like to bring you back to about here, at 1960.
I would like to compare South Korea, which is this one, with Brazil, which is this one.
And I would like to compare Uganda, which is there.
I can run it forward, like this.
And you can see how South Korea is making a very, very fast advancement, whereas Brazil is much slower.
And if we move back again, here, and we put trails on them, like this, you can see again that the speed of development is very, very different, and the countries are moving more or less at the same rate as money and health, but it seems you can move much faster if you are healthy first than if you are wealthy first.
And to show that, you can put on the way of United Arab Emirates.
They came from here, a mineral country.
They cached all the oil they got all the money but health cannot be bought at the supermarket.
You have to invest in health. You have to get kids into schooling.
You have to train health staff. You have to educate the population.
And Sheikh Zayed did that in a fairly good way.
In spite of falling oil prices, he brought this country up here.
So we've got a much more mainstream appearance of the world, where all countries tend to use their money better than they used it in the past.
Now, this is, more or less, if you look at the average data of the countries -- they are like this.
That's dangerous, to use average data, because there is such a lot of difference within countries.
So if I go and look here, we can see that Uganda today is where South Korea was in 1960.
If I split Uganda, there's quite a difference within Uganda.
These are the quintiles of Uganda.
The richest 20 percent of Ugandans are there.
The poorest are down there.
If I split South Africa, it's like this.
And if I go down and look at Niger, where there was such a terrible famine recently, it's like this.
The 20 percent poorest of Niger is out here, and the 20 percent richest of South Africa is there, and yet we tend to discuss what solutions there should be in Africa.
Everything in this world exists in Africa.
And you can't discuss universal access to HIV treatment for that quintile up here with the same strategy as down here.
The improvement of the world must be highly contextualized, and it's not relevant to have it on a regional level.
We must be much more detailed.
And even more, policy makers and the corporate sectors would like to see how the world is changing.
Now, why doesn't this take place?
Why are we not using the data we have?
We have data in the United Nations, in the national statistical agencies and in universities and other nongovernmental organizations.
Because the data is hidden down in the databases.
And the public is there, and the internet is there, but we have still not used it effectively.
All that information we saw changing in the world does not include publicly funded statistics.
There are some web pages like this, you know, but they take some nourishment down from the databases, but people put prices on them, stupid passwords and boring statistics.
And this won't work.
So what is needed? We have the databases.
It's not a new database that you need.
We have wonderful design tools and more and more are added up here.
So we started a nonprofit venture linking data to design, we called Gapminder, from the London Underground, where they warn you, Mind the gap.
So we thought Gapminder was appropriate.
And it wasn't that difficult.
You can take a data set and put it there.
We are liberating UN data, some few UN organization.
Some countries accept that their databases can go out on the world.
But what we really need is, of course, a search function, a search function where we can copy the data up to a searchable format and get it out in the world.
And what do we hear when we go around?
Everyone says, It's impossible. This can't be done.
Our information is so peculiar in detail, so that cannot be searched as others can be searched.
We cannot give the data free to the students, free to the entrepreneurs of the world.
But this is what we would like to see, isn't it?
And we would like flowers to grow out on the net.
One of the crucial points is to make them searchable, and then people can use the different design tools to animate it there.
And I have pretty good news for you.
I have good news that the current, new head of UN statistics doesn't say it's impossible.
He only says, We can't do it.
And that's a quite clever guy, huh?
So we can see a lot happening in data in the coming years.
We will be able to look at income distributions in completely new ways.
This is the income distribution of China, 1970.
This is the income distribution of the United States, 1970.
Almost no overlap.
Almost no overlap.
And what has happened?
What has happened is this that China is growing, it's not so equal any longer, and it's appearing here, overlooking the United States, almost like a ghost, isn't it?
It's pretty scary.
But I think it's very important to have all this information.
We need really to see it.
And instead of looking at this, I would like to end up by showing the internet users per 1,000.
In this software, we access about 500 variables from all the countries quite easily.
It takes some time to change for this, but on the axes, you can quite easily get any variable you would like to have.
And the thing would be to get up the databases free, to get them searchable, and with a second click, to get them into the graphic formats, where you can instantly understand them.
Now, statisticians don't like it, because they say that this will not show the reality we have to have statistical, analytical methods.
I end now with the world.
There, the internet is coming.
The number of internet users are going up like this.
This is the GDP per capita.
And it's a new technology coming in, but then amazingly, how well it fits to the economy of the countries.
That's why the 100 computer will be so important.
But it's a nice tendency.
It's as if the world is flattening off, isn't it?
These countries are lifting more than the economy, and it will be very interesting to follow this over the year, as I would like you to be able to do with all the publicly funded data.
Everyone, please think of your biggest personal goal.
For real -- you can take a second. You've got to feel this to learn it.
Take a few seconds and think of your personal biggest goal, okay?
Imagine deciding right now that you're going to do it.
Imagine telling someone that you meet today what you're going to do.
Imagine their congratulations, and their high image of you.
Doesn't it feel good to say it out loud?
Don't you feel one step closer already, like it's already becoming part of your identity?
Well, bad news you should have kept your mouth shut, because that good feeling now will make you less likely to do it.
The repeated psychology tests have proven that telling someone your goal makes it less likely to happen.
Any time you have a goal, there are some steps that need to be done, some work that needs to be done in order to achieve it.
Ideally you would not be satisfied until you'd actually done the work.
But when you tell someone your goal and they acknowledge it, psychologists have found that it's called a social reality.
The mind is kind of tricked into feeling that it's already done.
And then because you've felt that satisfaction, you're less motivated to do the actual hard work necessary.
So this goes against conventional wisdom that we should tell our friends our goals, right?
So they hold us to it.
So, let's look at the proof.
1926 Kurt Lewin, founder of social psychology, called this substitution.
1933 Wera Mahler found when it was acknowledged by others, it felt real in the mind.
1982, Peter Gollwitzer wrote a whole book about this, and in 2009, he did some new tests that were published.
It goes like this 163 people across four separate tests.
Everyone wrote down their personal goal.
Then half of them announced their commitment to this goal to the room, and half didn't.
Then everyone was given 45 minutes of work that would directly lead them towards their goal, but they were told that they could stop at any time.
Now, those who kept their mouths shut worked the entire 45 minutes on average, and when asked afterward, said that they felt that they had a long way to go still to achieve their goal.
But those who had announced it quit after only 33 minutes, on average, and when asked afterward, said that they felt much closer to achieving their goal.
So if this is true, what can we do?
Well, you could resist the temptation to announce your goal.
You can delay the gratification that the social acknowledgment brings, and you can understand that your mind mistakes the talking for the doing.
But if you do need to talk about something, you can state it in a way that gives you no satisfaction, such as, I really want to run this marathon, so I need to train five times a week and kick my ass if I don't, okay?
So audience, next time you're tempted to tell someone your goal, what will you say?
Silence Exactly! Well done.
Fifty-two minutes ago, I took this picture about 10 blocks from here.
This is the Grand Caf here in Oxford.
I took this picture because this turns out to be the first coffeehouse to open in England, in 1650.
That's its great claim to fame.
And I wanted to show it to you, not because I want to give you the Starbucks tour of historic England --  but rather because the English coffeehouse was crucial to the development and spread of one of the great intellectual flowerings of the last 500 years, what we now call the Enlightenment.
And the coffeehouse played such a big role in the birth of the Enlightenment in part because of what people were drinking there.
Because, before the spread of coffee and tea through British culture, what people drank -- both elite and mass folks drank -- day in and day out, from dawn until dusk, was alcohol.
Alcohol was the daytime beverage of choice.
You would drink a little beer with breakfast and have a little wine at lunch, a little gin, particularly around 1650, and top it off with a little beer and wine at the end of the day.
That was the healthy choice, because the water wasn't safe to drink.
And so, effectively, until the rise of the coffeehouse, you had an entire population that was effectively drunk all day.
And you can imagine what that would be like in your own life -- and I know this is true of some of you -- if you were drinking all day --  and then you switched from a depressant to a stimulant in your life.
You would have better ideas.
You would be sharper and more alert.
So it's not an accident that a great flowering of innovation happened as England switched to tea and coffee.
But the other thing that makes the coffeehouse important is the architecture of the space.
It was a space where people would get together, from different backgrounds, different fields of expertise, and share.
It was a space, as Matt Ridley talked about, where ideas could have sex.
This was their conjugal bed, in a sense ideas would get together there.
And an astonishing number of innovations from this period have a coffeehouse somewhere in their story.
I've been spending a lot of time thinking about coffeehouses for the last five years because I've been kind of on this quest to investigate this question of where good ideas come from.
What are the environments that lead to unusual levels of innovation, unusual levels of creativity?
What's the kind of environmental -- what is the space of creativity?
And what I've done is, I've looked at both environments like the coffeehouse, I've looked at media environments like the World Wide Web, that have been extraordinarily innovative I've gone back to the history of the first cities I've even gone to biological environments, like coral reefs and rain forests, that involve unusual levels of biological innovation.
And what I've been looking for is shared patterns, signature behavior that shows up again and again in all of these environments.
Are there recurring patterns that we can learn from, that we can take and apply to our own lives or our own organizations or our own environments to make them more creative and innovative?
But what you have to do to make sense of this and to really understand these principles is, you have to do away with the way in which our conventional metaphors and language steers us towards certain concepts of idea creation.
We have this very rich vocabulary to describe moments of inspiration.
We have the flash of insight, the stroke of insight, we have epiphanies, we have eureka moments, we have the light bulb moments, right?
All of these concepts, as rhetorically florid as they are, share this basic assumption, which is that an idea is a single thing.
It's something that happens often in a wonderful, illuminating moment.
But, in fact, what I would argue and what you really need to begin with is this idea that an idea is a network on the most elemental level.
I mean, this is what is happening inside your brain.
An idea -- a new idea -- is a new network of neurons firing in sync with each other inside your brain.
It's a new configuration that has never formed before.
And the question is How do you get your brain into environments where these new networks are going to be more likely to form?
And it turns out that, in fact, the network patterns of the outside world mimic a lot of the network patterns of the internal world of a human brain.
So the metaphor I'd like to use, I can take from a story of a great idea that's quite recent -- a lot more recent than the 1650s.
A wonderful guy named Timothy Prestero has an organization called Design That Matters.
They decided to tackle this really pressing problem of the terrible problems we have with infant mortality rates in the developing world.
One of the things that's very frustrating about this is that we know by getting modern neonatal incubators into any context, if we can keep premature babies warm, basically -- it's very simple -- we can halve infant mortality rates in those environments.
So the technology is there.
These are standard in all the industrialized worlds.
The problem is, if you buy a 40,000 incubator, and you send it off to a midsized village in Africa, it will work great for a year or two years, and then something will go wrong and it will break, and it will remain broken forever, because you don't have a whole system of spare parts, and you don't have the on-the-ground expertise to fix this 40,000 piece of equipment.
So you end up having this problem where you spend all this money getting aid and all these advanced electronics to these countries, and it ends up being useless.
So what Prestero and his team decided to do was to look around and see What are the abundant resources in these developing world contexts?
And what they noticed was, they don't have a lot of DVRs, they don't have a lot of microwaves, but they seem to do a pretty good job of keeping their cars on the road.
There's a Toyota 4Runner on the street in all these places.
They seem to have the expertise to keep cars working.
So they started to think, Could we build a neonatal incubator that's built entirely out of automobile parts?
And this is what they came up with.
It's called the NeoNurture device.
From the outside, it looks like a normal little thing you'd find in a modern Western hospital.
In the inside, it's all car parts.
It's got a fan, it's got headlights for warmth, it's got door chimes for alarm, it runs off a car battery.
And so all you need is the spare parts from your Toyota and the ability to fix a headlight, and you can repair this thing.
Now that's a great idea, but I'd like to say that, in fact, this is a great metaphor for the way ideas happen.
We like to think our breakthrough ideas, you know, are like that 40,000, brand-new incubator, state-of-the-art technology.
But more often than not, they're cobbled together from whatever parts that happen to be around nearby.
We take ideas from other people, people we've learned from, people we run into in the coffee shop, and we stitch them together into new forms and we create something new.
That's really where innovation happens.
And that means we have to change some of our models of what innovation and deep thinking really looks like, right?
I mean, this is one vision of it.
Another is Newton and the apple, when Newton was at Cambridge.
This is a statue from Oxford.
You know, you're sitting there, thinking a deep thought, the apple falls from the tree, and you have the theory of gravity.
In fact, the spaces that have historically led to innovation tend to look like this.
This is Hogarth's famous painting of a kind of political dinner at a tavern, but this is what the coffee shops looked like back then.
This is the kind of chaotic environment where ideas were likely to come together, where people were likely to have new, interesting, unpredictable collisions, people from different backgrounds.
So if we're trying to build organizations that are more innovative, we have to build spaces that, strangely enough, look a bit more like this.
This is what your office should look like, it's part of my message here.
And one of the problems with this is that, when you research this field, people are notoriously unreliable when they actually self-report on where they have their own good ideas, or their history of their best ideas.
And a few years ago, a wonderful researcher named Kevin Dunbar decided to go around and basically do the Big Brother approach to figuring out where good ideas come from.
He went to a bunch of science labs around the world and videotaped everyone as they were doing every little bit of their job when they were sitting in front of the microscope, when they were talking to colleagues at the watercooler ...
And he recorded all these conversations and tried to figure out where the most important ideas happened.
And when we think about the classic image of the scientist in the lab, we have this image -- you know, they're poring over the microscope, and they see something in the tissue sample, and -- Eureka! -- they've got the idea.
What happened, actually, when Dunbar looked at the tape, is that, in fact, almost all of the important breakthrough ideas did not happen alone in the lab, in front of the microscope.
They happened at the conference table at the weekly lab meeting, when everybody got together and shared their latest data and findings, oftentimes when people shared the mistakes they were having, the error, the noise in the signal they were discovering.
And something about that environment -- and I've started calling it the liquid network, where you have lots of different ideas that are together, different backgrounds, different interests, jostling with each other, bouncing off each other -- that environment is, in fact, the environment that leads to innovation.
The other problem that people have is, they like to condense their stories of innovation down to shorter time frames.
So they want to tell the story of the eureka moment.
They want to say, There I was, I was standing there, and I had it all, suddenly, clear in my head.
But, in fact, if you go back and look at the historical record, it turns out that a lot of important ideas have very long incubation periods.
I call this the slow hunch.
We've heard a lot recently about hunch and instinct and blink-like sudden moments of clarity, but, in fact, a lot of great ideas linger on, sometimes for decades, in the back of people's minds.
They have a feeling that there's an interesting problem, but they don't quite have the tools yet to discover them.
They spend all this time working on certain problems, but there's another thing lingering there that they're interested in, but can't quite solve.
Darwin himself, in his autobiography, tells the story of coming up with the idea for natural selection as a classic eureka moment.
He's in his study, it's October of 1838, and he's reading Malthus, actually, on population.
And all of a sudden, the basic algorithm of natural selection kind of pops into his head, and he says, Ah, at last, I had a theory with which to work.
That's in his autobiography.
About a decade or two ago, a wonderful scholar named Howard Gruber went back and looked at Darwin's notebooks from this period.
Darwin kept these copious notebooks, where he wrote down every little idea he had, every little hunch.
And what Gruber found was that Darwin had the full theory of natural selection for months and months and months before he had his alleged epiphany reading Malthus in October of 1838.
There are passages where you can read it, and you think you're reading from a Darwin textbook, from the period before he has his epiphany.
And so what you realize is that Darwin, in a sense, had the idea, he had the concept, but was unable to fully think it yet.
And that is, actually, how great ideas often happen -- they fade into view over long periods of time.
Now the challenge for all of us is How do you create environments that allow these ideas to have this long half-life?
It's hard to go to your boss and say, I have an excellent idea for our organization.
It will be useful in 2020.
Could you just give me some time to do that?
Now a couple of companies like Google have innovation time off, 20 percent time.
In a sense, those are hunch-cultivating mechanisms in an organization.
But that's a key thing.
And the other thing is to allow those hunches to connect with other people's hunches that's what often happens.
You have half of an idea, somebody else has the other half, and if you're in the right environment, they turn into something larger than the sum of their parts.
So in a sense, we often talk about the value of protecting intellectual property -- you know, building barricades, having secretive R and D labs, patenting everything that we have so that those ideas will remain valuable, and people will be incentivized to come up with more ideas, and the culture will be more innovative.
But I think there's a case to be made that we should spend at least as much time, if not more, valuing the premise of connecting ideas and not just protecting them.
And I'll leave you with this story, which I think captures a lot of these values.
It's just a wonderful tale of innovation, and how it happens in unlikely ways.
It's October of 1957, and Sputnik has just launched.
And we're in Laurel, Maryland, at the Applied Physics Lab associated with Johns Hopkins University.
It's Monday morning, and the news has just broken about this satellite that's now orbiting the planet.
And, of course, this is nerd heaven, right?
There are all these physics geeks who are there, thinking, Oh my gosh! This is incredible. I can't believe this has happened.
And two of them, two twentysomething researchers at the APL, are there at the cafeteria table, having an informal conversation with a bunch of their colleagues.
And these two guys are named Guier and Weiffenbach.
They start talking, and one of them says, Hey, has anybody tried to listen for this thing?
There's this, you know, man-made satellite up there in outer space that's obviously broadcasting some kind of signal.
So they ask around to a couple of their colleagues, and everybody's like, No, I hadn't thought of doing that.
That's an interesting idea.
And it turns out Weiffenbach is kind of an expert in microwave reception, and he's got a little antenna set up with an amplifier in his office.
So Guier and Weiffenbach go back to Weiffenbach's office, and they start noodling around -- hacking, as we might call it now.
And after a couple of hours, they start picking up the signal, because the Soviets made Sputnik very easy to track it was right at 20 MHz, so you could pick it up really easily, because they were afraid people would think it was a hoax, basically, so they made it really easy to find.
So these guys are sitting there, listening to this signal, and people start coming into the office and saying, That's pretty cool. Can I hear?
And before long, they think, Jeez, this is kind of historic.
We may be the first people in the United States listening to this.
We should record it.
So they bring in this big, clunky analog tape recorder and start recording these little bleep, bleeps.
And they start writing down the date stamp, time stamps for each little bleep that they record.
And then they start thinking, Well, gosh, we're noticing small little frequency variations here.
We could probably calculate the speed that the satellite is traveling if we do a little basic math here using the Doppler effect.
And they played around with it a little bit more and talked to a couple of their colleagues who had other specialties.
And they said, You know, we could actually look at the slope of the Doppler effect to figure out the points at which the satellite is closest to our antenna and the points at which it's furthest away.
That's pretty cool.
Eventually, they get permission -- this is all a little side project that hadn't been officially part of their job description -- they get permission to use the new UNIVAC computer that takes up an entire room that they'd just gotten at the APL.
And they run some more of the numbers, and at the end of about three or four weeks, turns out they have mapped the exact trajectory of this satellite around the Earth, just from listening to this one little signal, going off on this little side hunch that they'd been inspired to do over lunch one morning.
A couple weeks later, their boss, Frank McClure, pulls them into the room and says, Hey, you guys, I have to ask you something about that project you were working on.
You've figured out an unknown location of a satellite orbiting the planet from a known location on the ground.
Could you go the other way?
Could you figure out an unknown location on the ground if you knew the location of the satellite?
And they thought about it and they said, Well, I guess maybe you could. Let's run the numbers here.
So they went back and thought about it and came back and said, Actually, it'll be easier.
And he said, Oh, that's great, because, see, I have these new nuclear submarines  that I'm building.
And it's really hard to figure out how to get your missile so that it will land right on top of Moscow if you don't know where the submarine is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.
So we're thinking we could throw up a bunch of satellites and use it to track our submarines and figure out their location in the middle of the ocean.
Could you work on that problem?
Thirty years later, Ronald Reagan, actually, opened it up and made it an open platform that anybody could build upon, and anybody could come along and build new technology that would create and innovate on top of this open platform, left it open for anyone to do pretty much anything they wanted with it.
And now, I guarantee you, certainly half of this room, if not more, has a device sitting in their pocket right now that is talking to one of these satellites in outer space.
And I bet you one of you, if not more, has used said device and said satellite system to locate a nearby coffeehouse somewhere in the last --  in the last day or last week, right?
And that, I think, is a great case study, a great lesson in the power -- the marvelous, unplanned, emergent, unpredictable power -- of open innovative systems.
When you build them right, they will be led to completely new directions the creators never even dreamed of.
